1. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 24:msae093. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae093. Online ahead of 
print.

Severe Bottleneck Impacted the Genomic Structure of Egg-Eating Cichlids in Lake 
Victoria.

Imamoto M(1), Nakamura H(1)(2), Aibara M(1), Hatashima R(1), Kimirei IA(3), 
Kashindye BB(4), Itoh T(1), Nikaido M(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Research Center for Integrative Evolutionary Science, The Graduate University 
for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute (TAFIRI), Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(4)Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute (TAFIRI), Mwanza, Tanzania.

Within 15,000 years, the explosive adaptive radiation of haplochromine cichlids 
in Lake Victoria, East Africa, generated 500 endemic species. In the 1980s, the 
upsurge of Nile perch, a carnivorous fish artificially introduced to the lake, 
drove the extinction of more than 200 endemic cichlids. The Nile perch predation 
particularly harmed piscivorous cichlids, including paedophages, cichlids eat 
eggs and fries, which is an example of the unique trophic adaptation seen in 
African cichlids. Here, aiming to investigate past demographic events possibly 
triggered by the invasion of Nile perch and the subsequent impacts on the 
genetic structure of cichlids, we conducted large-scale comparative genomics. We 
discovered evidence of recent bottleneck events in four species, including two 
paedophages, which began during the 1970s-1980s, and population size rebounded 
during the 1990s-2000s. The timing of the bottleneck corresponded to the 
historical records of endemic haplochromines' disappearance and later 
resurgence, which is likely associated with the introduction of Nile perch by 
commercial demand to Lake Victoria in the 1950s. Interestingly, among the four 
species that likely experienced bottleneck, Haplochromis sp. 'matumbi hunter,' a 
paedophagous cichlid, showed the most severe bottleneck signatures. The 
components of shared ancestry inferred by ADMIXTURE suggested a high genetic 
differentiation between matumbi hunter and other species. In contrast, our 
phylogenetic analyses highly supported the monophyly of the five paedophages, 
consistent with the results of previous studies. We conclude that high genetic 
differentiation of matumbi hunter occurred due to the loss of shared genetic 
components among haplochromines in Lake Victoria caused by the recent severe 
bottleneck.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae093
PMID: 38782570


2. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 23:msae100. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae100. Online ahead of 
print.

The evolution of transglutaminases underlies the origin and loss of cornified 
skin appendages in vertebrates.

Sachslehner AP(1), Surbek M(1), Holthaus KB(1), Steinbinder J(1), Golabi B(1), 
Hess C(2), Eckhart L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.
(2)Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, Department for Farm Animals and 
Veterinary Public Health, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Austria.

Transglutaminases (TGMs) cross-link proteins by introducing covalent bonds 
between glutamine and lysine residues. These cross-links are essential for 
epithelial cornification which enables tetrapods to live on land. Here we 
investigated which evolutionary adaptations of vertebrates were associated with 
specific changes in the family of TGM genes. We determined the catalog of TGMs 
in the main clades of vertebrates, performed a comprehensive phylogenetic 
analysis of TGMs and localized the distribution of selected TGMs in tissues. Our 
data suggest that TGM1 is the phylogenetically oldest epithelial TGM, with 
orthologs being expressed in the cornified teeth of the lamprey, a basal 
vertebrate. Gene duplications led to the origin of TGM10 in stem vertebrates, 
the origin of TGM2 in jawed vertebrates and an increasing number of 
epithelium-associated TGM genes in the lineage leading to terrestrial 
vertebrates. TGM9 is expressed in the epithelial egg tooth, and its evolutionary 
origin in stem amniotes coincided with the evolution of embryonic development in 
eggs that are surrounded by a protective shell. Conversely, viviparous mammals 
have lost both the epithelial egg tooth and TGM9. TGM3 and TGM6 evolved as 
regulators of cornification in hair follicles and underwent pseudogenization 
upon the evolutionary loss of hair in cetaceans. Taken together, this study 
reveals the gain and loss of vertebrate TGM genes in association with the 
evolution of cornified skin appendages and suggests an important role of TGM9 in 
the evolution of amniotes.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae100
PMID: 38781495


3. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 22:msae096. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae096. Online ahead of 
print.

Dating ammonia-oxidizing bacteria with abundant eukaryotic fossils.

Liao T(1), Wang S(1), Zhang H(1), Stüeken EE(2), Luo H(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Simon F. S. Li Marine Science Laboratory, School of Life Sciences and State 
Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Shatin, Hong Kong SAR.
(2)School of Earth and Environmental Sciences and Centre for Exoplanet Science, 
University of St Andrews, Bute Building, Queen's Terrace, KY16 9TS, UK.
(3)Earth and Environmental Sciences Programme, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR.
(4)Institute of Environment, Energy and Sustainability, The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR.

Evolution of a complete nitrogen cycle relies on the onset of ammonia oxidation, 
which aerobically converts ammonia to nitrogen oxides. However, accurate 
estimation of the antiquity of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria (AOB) remains 
challenging because AOB-specific fossils are absent and bacterial fossils 
amenable to calibrate molecular clocks are rare. Leveraging the ancient 
endosymbiosis of mitochondria and plastid, as well as using state-of-the-art 
Bayesian sequential dating approach, we obtained a timeline of AOB evolution 
calibrated largely by eukaryotic fossils. We show that the first AOB evolved in 
marine Gammaproteobacteria (Gamma-AOB) and emerged between 2.1 and 1.9 billion 
years ago (Ga), thus postdating the Great Oxidation Event (GOE; 2.4-2.32 Ga). To 
reconcile the sedimentary nitrogen isotopic signatures of ammonia oxidation 
occurring near the GOE, we propose that ammonia oxidation likely occurred at the 
common ancestor of Gamma-AOB and Gammaproteobacterial methanotrophs, or the 
actinobacterial/verrucomicrobial methanotrophs which are known to have ammonia 
oxidation activities. It is also likely that nitrite was transported from the 
terrestrial habitats where ammonia oxidation by archaea took place. Further, we 
show that the Gamma-AOB predated the anaerobic ammonia oxidizing (anammox) 
bacteria, implying that the emergence of anammox was constrained by the 
availability of dedicated ammonia oxidizers which produce nitrite to fuel 
anammox. Our work supports a new hypothesis that nitrogen redox cycle involving 
nitrogen oxides evolved rather late in the ocean.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae096
PMID: 38776415


4. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 20:msae098. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae098. Online ahead of 
print.

Wiring between close nodes in molecular networks evolves more quickly than 
between distant nodes.

Gil-Gomez A(1), Rest JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Laufer Center for Physical and 
Quantitative Biology, Stony Brook University, 650 Life Sciences, Stony Brook, NY 
11794-4254.

As species diverge, a wide range of evolutionary processes lead to changes in 
protein-protein interaction networks and metabolic networks. The rate at which 
molecular networks evolve is an important question in evolutionary biology. 
Previous empirical work has focused on interactomes from model organisms to 
calculate rewiring rates, but this is limited by the relatively small number of 
species and sparse nature of network data across species. We present a proxy for 
variation in network topology: variation in drug-drug interactions (DDIs), 
obtained by studying drug combinations (DCs) across taxa. Here, we propose the 
rate at which DDIs change across species as an estimate of the rate at which the 
underlying molecular network changes as species diverge. We computed the 
evolutionary rates of DDIs using previously published data from a high 
throughput study in gram-negative bacteria. Using phylogenetic comparative 
methods, we found that DDIs diverge rapidly over short evolutionary time 
periods, but that divergence saturates over longer time periods. In parallel, we 
mapped drugs with known targets in protein-protein interaction and co-functional 
networks. We found that the targets of synergistic DDIs are closer in these 
networks than other types of DCs and that synergistic interactions have a higher 
evolutionary rate, meaning that nodes that are closer evolve at a faster rate. 
Future studies of network evolution may use DC data to gain larger-scale 
perspectives on the details of network evolution within and between species.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae098
PMID: 38768245


5. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 20:msae099. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae099. Online ahead of 
print.

Signatures of adaptation and purifying selection in highland populations of 
Dasiphora fruticosa.

Yang FS(1)(2)(3), Liu M(4), Guo X(4), Xu C(1)(2), Jiang J(1)(2)(3), Mu W(4), 
Fang D(4), Xu YC(1)(2), Zhang FM(1)(2)(3), Wang YH(1)(2)(3), Yang T(4), Chen 
H(4), Sahu SK(4), Li R(4)(3), Wang G(4), Wang Q(1)(2)(3), Xu X(4), Ge 
S(1)(2)(3), Liu H(4)(3), Guo YL(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Systematic and Evolutionary Botany, Institute of 
Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, China.
(2)China National Botanical Garden, Beijing 100093, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Genomics, Key Laboratory of Genomics, 
Ministry of Agriculture, BGI Research, Shenzhen 518083, China.

High mountains harbor a considerable proportion of biodiversity, but we know 
little about how diverse plants adapt to the harsh environment. Here we finished 
a high-quality genome assembly for Dasiphora fruticosa, an ecologically 
important plant distributed in the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau and lowland of the 
Northern Hemisphere, and resequenced 592 natural individuals to address how this 
horticulture plant adapts to highland. Demographic analysis revealed D. 
fruticosa underwent a bottleneck after Naynayxungla Glaciation. Selective sweep 
analysis of two pairs of lowland and highland population identified 63 shared 
genes related to cell wall organization or biogenesis, cellular component 
organization, and dwarfism, suggesting parallel adaptation to highland habitats. 
Most importantly, we found that stronger purging of estimated genetic load due 
to inbreeding in highland populations apparently contributed to their adaptation 
to the highest mountain. Our results revealed how plants could tolerate the 
extreme plateau, which could provide potential insights for species conservation 
and crop breeding.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae099
PMID: 38768215


6. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 17:msae097. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae097. Online ahead of 
print.

Connecting species-specific extents of genome reduction in mitochondria and 
plastids.

Giannakis K(1), Richards L(2), Dauda KA(1), Johnston IG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK.
(3)Computational Biology Unit, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

Mitochondria and plastids have both dramatically reduced their genomes since the 
endosymbiotic events that created them. The similarities and differences in the 
evolution of the two organelle genome types has been the target of discussion 
and investigation for decades. Ongoing work has suggested that similar 
mechanisms may modulate the reductive evolution of the two organelles in a given 
species, but quantitative data and statistical analyses exploring this picture 
remain limited outside of some specific cases like parasitism. Here, we use 
cross-eukaryote organelle genome data to explore evidence for coevolution of 
mitochondrial and chloroplast genome reduction. Controlling for differences 
between clades and pseudoreplication due to relatedness, we find that extents of 
mtDNA and ptDNA gene retention are related to each other across taxa, in a 
generally positive correlation that appears to differ quantitatively across 
eukaryotes, for example, between algal and non-algal species. We find limited 
evidence for coevolution of specific mtDNA and ptDNA gene pairs, suggesting that 
the similarities between the two organelle types may be due mainly to 
independent responses to consistent evolutionary drivers.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae097
PMID: 38758976


7. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 17:msae095. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae095. Online ahead of 
print.

Evolutionary dynamics of chromatin structure and duplicate gene expression in 
diploid and allopolyploid cotton.

Hu G(1)(2), Grover CE(3), Vera DL(4), Lung PY(5), Girimurugan SB(6), Miller 
ER(3), Conover JL(3)(7)(8), Ou S(9), Xiong X(2), Zhu D(2), Li D(10)(2), 
Gallagher JP(11), Udall JA(12), Sui X(5), Zhang J(5), Bass HW(4), Wendel JF(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Bio-breeding and Integrated, Institute of 
Cotton Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang, China 455000.
(2)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Key 
Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Shenzhen, China 518120.
(3)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, Iowa, USA 50011.
(4)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, 
Florida, USA 32306.
(5)Department of Statistics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA 
32306.
(6)Dept of Mathematics, Florida Gulf Coast University, Florida, USA 33965.
(7)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA 85721.
(8)Department of Molecular & Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA 85721.
(9)Department of Molecular Genetics, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA 
43210.
(10)Zhengzhou Research Base, State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, School of 
Agricultural Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China 450000.
(11)Forage Seed and Cereal Research Unit, USDA/Agricultural Research Service, 
Corvallis, Oregon, USA 97331.
(12)Crop Germplasm Research Unit, USDA/Agricultural Research Service, College 
Station, Texas, USA 77845.

Polyploidy is a prominent mechanism of plant speciation and adaptation, yet the 
mechanistic understandings of duplicated gene regulation remain elusive. 
Chromatin structure dynamics are suggested to govern gene regulatory control. 
Here we characterized genome-wide nucleosome organization and chromatin 
accessibility in allotetraploid cotton, Gossypium hirsutum (AADD, 2n=4X=52), 
relative to its two diploid parents (AA or DD genome) and their synthetic 
diploid hybrid (AD), using DNS-seq. The larger A-genome exhibited wider average 
nucleosome spacing in diploids, and this inter-genomic difference diminished in 
the allopolyploid but not hybrid. Allopolyploidization also exhibited increased 
accessibility at promoters genome-wide and synchronized cis-regulatory motifs 
between subgenomes. A prominent cis-acting control was inferred for chromatin 
dynamics and demonstrated by transposable element removal from promoters. 
Linking accessibility to gene expression patterns, we found distinct regulatory 
effects for hybridization and later allopolyploid stages, including nuanced 
establishment of homoeolog expression bias and expression level dominance. 
Histone gene expression and nucleosome organization are coordinated through 
chromatin accessibility. Our study demonstrates the capability to track high 
resolution chromatin structure dynamics and reveals their role in the evolution 
of cis-regulatory landscapes and duplicate gene expression in polyploids, 
illuminating regulatory ties to subgenomic asymmetry and dominance.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae095
PMID: 38758089


8. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 14:msae091. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae091. Online ahead of 
print.

Boundary effects cause false signals of range expansions in population genomic 
data.

Kemppainen P(1)(2), Schembri R(3)(4), Momigliano P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Area of Ecology and Biodiversity, School of Biological Sciences, the 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, People's Republic of  China.
(2)School of Biological Sciences and Swire Institute of Marine Science, Faculty 
of Science, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, People's Republic of 
 China.
(3)School of Natural Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Macquarie 
University, Sydney, Australia.
(4)Division of Ecology and Evolution, Research School of Biology, Australian 
National University, Canberra, Australia.

Studying range expansions (REs) is central for understanding genetic variation 
through space and time as well as for identifying refugia and biological 
invasions. Range expansions are characterized by serial founder events causing 
clines of decreasing diversity away from the center of origin and asymmetries in 
the two-dimensional allele frequency spectra. These asymmetries, summarized by 
the directionality index (ψ), are sensitive to REs and persist for longer than 
clines in genetic diversity. In continuous and finite meta-populations, genetic 
drift tends to be stronger at the edges of the species distribution in 
equilibrium populations and populations undergoing REs alike. Such boundary 
effects (BEs) are expected to affect geographic patterns in genetic diversity 
and ψ. Here we demonstrate that BEs cause high false positive rates in 
equilibrium meta-populations when testing for REs. In the simulations, the 
absolute value of ψ (|ψ|) in equilibrium data sets was proportional to the 
fixation index (FST). By fitting signatures of REs as a function of ɛ=|ψ|/FST 
and geographic clines in ψ, strong evidence for REs could be detected in data 
from a recent rapid invasion of the cane toad, Rhinella marina, in Australia, 
but not in 28 previously published empirical data sets from Australian scincid 
lizards that were significant for the standard RE tests. Thus, while clinal 
variation in ψ is still the most sensitive statistic to REs, to detect true 
signatures of REs in natural populations, its magnitude needs to be considered 
in relation to the overall levels of genetic structuring in the data.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae091
PMID: 38743590


9. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 14:msae092. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae092. Online ahead of 
print.

Evolution of chromosomal inversions across an avian radiation.

Knief U(1)(2), Müller IA(1)(3)(4), Stryjewski KF(5), Metzler D(1), Sorenson 
MD(5), Wolf JBW(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, Ludwig Maximilian 
University of Munich, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Evolutionary Biology & Ecology, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, 
79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics and Genetics, Swedish Museum of Natural History, 
11418 Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Division of Systematics and Evolution, Department of Zoology, Stockholm 
University, 11418 Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA 02215.

Chromosomal inversions are structural mutations that can play a prominent role 
in adaptation and speciation. Inversions segregating across species boundaries 
(trans-species inversions) are often taken as evidence for ancient balancing 
selection or adaptive introgression but can also be due to incomplete lineage 
sorting (ILS). Using whole-genome resequencing data from 18 populations of 11 
recognized munia species in the genus Lonchura (N = 176 individuals), we 
identify four large para- and pericentric inversions ranging in size from 4 to 
20 Mb. All four inversions co-segregate across multiple species and predate the 
numerous speciation events associated with the rapid radiation of this clade 
across the prehistoric Sahul (Australia, New Guinea) and Bismarck Archipelago. 
Using coalescent theory, we infer that trans-specificity is improbable for 
neutrally segregating variation despite substantial ILS characterizing this 
young radiation. Instead, maintenance of all three autosomal inversions (chr1, 
chr5, chr6) is best explained by selection acting along eco-geographic clines 
not observed for the collinear parts of the genome. In addition, the large sex 
chromosome inversion largely aligns with species boundaries and shows signatures 
of repeated positive selection for both alleles. This study provides evidence 
for trans-species inversion polymorphisms involved in both adaptation and 
speciation. It further highlights the importance of informing selection 
inference using a null model of neutral evolution derived from the collinear 
part of the genome.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae092
PMID: 38743589


10. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 13:msae090. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae090. Online ahead of 
print.

Diversity and molecular evolution of non-visual opsin genes across 
environmental, developmental, and morphological adaptations in frogs.

Boyette JL(1)(2)(3)(4), Bell RC(3)(4), Fujita MK(5), Thomas KN(5)(6), Streicher 
JW(6), Gower DJ(6), Schott RK(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, State 
College, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Berry College, Rome, Georgia, USA.
(3)Department of Vertebrate Zoology, National Museum of Natural History, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC, USA.
(4)Department of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, Amphibian and Reptile Diversity Research Center, The 
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, UK.
(7)Department of Biology & Centre for Vision Research, York University, Toronto, 
Ontario, CAN.

Non-visual opsins are transmembrane proteins expressed in the eyes and other 
tissues of many animals. When paired with a light-sensitive chromophore, 
non-visual opsins form photopigments involved in various non-visual, 
light-detection functions including circadian rhythm regulation, light-seeking 
behaviors, and seasonal responses. Here we investigate the molecular evolution 
of non-visual opsin genes in anuran amphibians (frogs and toads). We test 
several evolutionary hypotheses including the predicted loss of non-visual 
opsins due to nocturnal ancestry and potential functional differences in 
non-visual opsins resulting from environmental light variation across diverse 
anuran ecologies. Using whole-eye transcriptomes of 81 species, combined with 
genomes, multi-tissue transcriptomes, and independently annotated genes from an 
additional 21 species, we identify which non-visual opsins are present in anuran 
genomes and those that are also expressed in the eyes, compare selective 
constraint among genes, and test for potential adaptive evolution by comparing 
selection between discrete ecological classes. At the genomic level, we 
recovered all 18 ancestral vertebrate non-visual opsins, indicating that anurans 
demonstrate the lowest documented amount of opsin gene loss among ancestrally 
nocturnal tetrapods. We consistently found expression of 14 non-visual opsins in 
anuran eyes and detected positive selection in a subset of these genes. We also 
found shifts in selective constraint acting on non-visual opsins in frogs with 
differing activity periods, habitats, distributions, life histories, and pupil 
shapes, which may reflect functional adaptation. Although many non-visual opsins 
remain poorly understood, these findings provide insight into the diversity and 
evolution of these genes across anurans, filling an important gap in our 
understanding of vertebrate opsins and setting the stage for future research on 
their functional evolution across taxa.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae090
PMID: 38736374


11. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae089. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae089.

Functional Divergence in Orthologous Transcription Factors: Insights from 
AtCBF2/3/1 and OsDREB1C.

Deng D(1), Guo Y(1), Guo L(1), Li C(1), Nie Y(1), Wang S(1), Wu W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Silviculture, College of Forestry and 
Biotechnology, Zhejiang A&F University, Hangzhou 311300, China.
(2)Zhejiang International Science and Technology Cooperation Base for Plant 
Germplasm Resources Conservation and Utilization, Zhejiang A&F University, 
Hangzhou 311300, China.

Despite traditional beliefs of orthologous genes maintaining similar functions 
across species, growing evidence points to their potential for functional 
divergence. C-repeat binding factors/dehydration-responsive element binding 
protein 1s (CBFs/DREB1s) are critical in cold acclimation, with their 
overexpression enhancing stress tolerance but often constraining plant growth. 
In contrast, a recent study unveiled a distinctive role of rice OsDREB1C in 
elevating nitrogen use efficiency (NUE), photosynthesis, and grain yield, 
implying functional divergence within the CBF/DREB1 orthologs across species. 
Here, we delve into divergent molecular mechanisms of OsDREB1C and AtCBF2/3/1 by 
exploring their evolutionary trajectories across rice and Arabidopsis genomes, 
regulatomes, and transcriptomes. Evolutionary scrutiny shows discrete clades for 
OsDREB1C and AtCBF2/3/1, with the Poaceae-specific DREB1C clade mediated by a 
transposon event. Genome-wide binding profiles highlight OsDREB1C's preference 
for GCCGAC compared to AtCBF2/3/1's preference for A/GCCGAC, a distinction 
determined by R12 in the OsDREB1C AP2/ERF domain. Cross-species multiomic 
analyses reveal shared gene orthogroups (OGs) and underscore numerous specific 
OGs uniquely bound and regulated by OsDREB1C, implicated in NUE, photosynthesis, 
and early flowering, or by AtCBF2/3/1, engaged in hormone and stress responses. 
This divergence arises from gene gains/losses (∼16.7% to 25.6%) and expression 
reprogramming (∼62.3% to 66.2%) of OsDREB1C- and AtCBF2/3/1-regulated OGs during 
the extensive evolution following the rice-Arabidopsis split. Our findings 
illustrate the regulatory evolution of OsDREB1C and AtCBF2/3/1 at a genomic 
scale, providing insights on the functional divergence of orthologous 
transcription factors following gene duplications across species.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae089
PMCID: PMC11119335
PMID: 38723179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae088. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae088.

Macroevolutionary Dynamics in Micro-organisms: Generalists Give Rise to 
Specialists Across Biomes in the Ubiquitous Bacterial Phylum Myxococcota.

Padfield D(1), Kay S(1), Vos R(2)(3), Quince C(4)(5), Vos M(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Environment and Sustainability Institute, Penryn Campus, Penryn TR10 9FE, UK.
(2)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, P.O. Box 9517, 2300 RA Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Biology Leiden, Leiden University, 2333 BE Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Organisms and Ecosystems, Earlham Institute, Norwich NR4 7UZ, UK.
(5)Gut Microbes and Health, Quadram Institute, Norwich NR4 7UQ, UK.
(6)European Centre for Environment and Human Health, Penryn Campus, Penryn TR10 
9FE, UK.

Prokaryotes dominate the Tree of Life, but our understanding of the 
macroevolutionary processes generating this diversity is still limited. Habitat 
transitions are thought to be a key driver of prokaryote diversity. However, 
relatively little is known about how prokaryotes successfully transition and 
persist across environments, and how these processes might vary between biomes 
and lineages. Here, we investigate biome transitions and specialization in 
natural populations of a focal bacterial phylum, the Myxococcota, sampled across 
a range of replicated soils and freshwater and marine sediments in Cornwall 
(UK). By targeted deep sequencing of the protein-coding gene rpoB, we found 
>2,000 unique Myxococcota lineages, with the majority (77%) classified as biome 
specialists and with only <5% of lineages distributed across the salt barrier. 
Discrete character evolution models revealed that specialists in one biome 
rarely transitioned into specialists in another biome. Instead, evolved 
generalism mediated transitions between biome specialists. State-dependent 
diversification models found variation in speciation rates across the tree, but 
this variation was independent of biome association or specialization. Our 
findings were robust to phylogenetic uncertainty, different levels of species 
delineation, and different assumed amounts of unsampled diversity resulting in 
an incomplete phylogeny. Overall, our results are consistent with a 
"jack-of-all-trades" tradeoff where generalists suffer a cost in any individual 
environment, resulting in rapid evolution of niche specialists and shed light on 
how bacteria could transition between biomes.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae088
PMCID: PMC11127111
PMID: 38717941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae086. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae086.

Unpredictability of the Fitness Effects of Antimicrobial Resistance Mutations 
Across Environments in Escherichia coli.

Hinz A(1)(2)(3), Amado A(4)(5)(6), Kassen R(2)(3), Bank C(4)(5)(6), Wong A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1N 6N5, Canada.
(3)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1B1, Canada.
(4)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Division of Theoretical Ecology and Evolution, Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)Evolutionary Dynamics Group, Gulbenkian Science Institute, Oeiras, Portugal.

The evolution of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in bacteria is a major public 
health concern, and antibiotic restriction is often implemented to reduce the 
spread of resistance. These measures rely on the existence of deleterious 
fitness effects (i.e. costs) imposed by AMR mutations during growth in the 
absence of antibiotics. According to this assumption, resistant strains will be 
outcompeted by susceptible strains that do not pay the cost during the period of 
restriction. The fitness effects of AMR mutations are generally studied in 
laboratory reference strains grown in standard growth environments; however, the 
genetic and environmental context can influence the magnitude and direction of a 
mutation's fitness effects. In this study, we measure how three sources of 
variation impact the fitness effects of Escherichia coli AMR mutations: the type 
of resistance mutation, the genetic background of the host, and the growth 
environment. We demonstrate that while AMR mutations are generally costly in 
antibiotic-free environments, their fitness effects vary widely and depend on 
complex interactions between the mutation, genetic background, and environment. 
We test the ability of the Rough Mount Fuji fitness landscape model to reproduce 
the empirical data in simulation. We identify model parameters that reasonably 
capture the variation in fitness effects due to genetic variation. However, the 
model fails to accommodate the observed variation when considering multiple 
growth environments. Overall, this study reveals a wealth of variation in the 
fitness effects of resistance mutations owing to genetic background and 
environmental conditions, which will ultimately impact their persistence in 
natural populations.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae086
PMCID: PMC11110942
PMID: 38709811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae087. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae087.

Genetic Causes and Genomic Consequences of Breakdown of Distyly in Linum 
trigynum.

Gutiérrez-Valencia J(1), Zervakis PI(1), Postel Z(1), Fracassetti M(1), Losvik 
A(1), Mehrabi S(1), Bunikis I(2), Soler L(3), Hughes PW(1), Désamoré A(1), 
Laenen B(1), Abdelaziz M(4), Pettersson OV(2), Arroyo J(5), Slotte T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Environment and Plant Sciences, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala Genome Center, 
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden (NBIS), Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(5)Department of Plant Biology and Ecology, University of Seville, Seville, 
Spain.

Distyly is an iconic floral polymorphism governed by a supergene, which promotes 
efficient pollen transfer and outcrossing through reciprocal differences in the 
position of sexual organs in flowers, often coupled with heteromorphic 
self-incompatibility. Distyly has evolved convergently in multiple flowering 
plant lineages, but has also broken down repeatedly, often resulting in 
homostylous, self-compatible populations with elevated rates of 
self-fertilization. Here, we aimed to study the genetic causes and genomic 
consequences of the shift to homostyly in Linum trigynum, which is closely 
related to distylous Linum tenue. Building on a high-quality genome assembly, we 
show that L. trigynum harbors a genomic region homologous to the dominant 
haplotype of the distyly supergene conferring long stamens and short styles in 
L. tenue, suggesting that loss of distyly first occurred in a short-styled 
individual. In contrast to homostylous Primula and Fagopyrum, L. trigynum 
harbors no fixed loss-of-function mutations in coding sequences of S-linked 
distyly candidate genes. Instead, floral gene expression analyses and controlled 
crosses suggest that mutations downregulating the S-linked LtWDR-44 candidate 
gene for male self-incompatibility and/or anther height could underlie homostyly 
and self-compatibility in L. trigynum. Population genomic analyses of 224 
whole-genome sequences further demonstrate that L. trigynum is highly 
self-fertilizing, exhibits significantly lower genetic diversity genome-wide, 
and is experiencing relaxed purifying selection and less frequent positive 
selection on nonsynonymous mutations relative to L. tenue. Our analyses shed 
light on the loss of distyly in L. trigynum, and advance our understanding of a 
common evolutionary transition in flowering plants.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae087
PMCID: PMC11114476
PMID: 38709782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae083. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae083.

Wright's Hierarchical F-Statistics.

Uyenoyama MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Box 90338, Durham, NC 27708-0338, 
USA.

This perspective article offers a meditation on FST and other quantities 
developed by Sewall Wright to describe the population structure, defined as any 
departure from reproduction through random union of gametes. Concepts related to 
the F-statistics draw from studies of the partitioning of variation, identity 
coefficients, and diversity measures. Relationships between the first two 
approaches have recently been clarified and unified. This essay addresses the 
third pillar of the discussion: Nei's GST and related measures. A hierarchy of 
probabilities of identity-by-state provides a description of the relationships 
among levels of a structured population with respect to genetic diversity. 
Explicit expressions for the identity-by-state probabilities are determined for 
models of structured populations undergoing regular inbreeding and recurrent 
mutation. Levels of genetic diversity within and between subpopulations reflect 
mutation as well as migration. Accordingly, indices of the population structure 
are inherently locus-specific, contrary to the intentions of Wright. Some 
implications of this locus-specificity are explored.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae083
PMCID: PMC11118444
PMID: 38696269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 2:msae085. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae085. Online ahead of 
print.

Non-Poissonian bursts in the arrival of phenotypic variation can strongly affect 
the dynamics of adaptation.

Martin NS(1), Schaper S(1), Camargo CQ(1)(2), Louis AA(1).

Author information:
(1)Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(2)Faculty of Environment, Science and Economy, University of Exeter, Exeter, 
UK.

Modelling the rate at which adaptive phenotypes appear in a population is a key 
to predicting evolutionary processes. Given random mutations, should this rate 
be modelled by a simple Poisson process, or is a more complex dynamics needed? 
Here we use analytic calculations and simulations of evolving populations on 
explicit genotype-phenotype maps to show that the introduction of novel 
phenotypes can be 'bursty' or overdispersed. In other words, a novel phenotype 
either appears multiple times in quick succession, or not at all for many 
generations. These bursts are fundamentally caused by statistical fluctuations 
and other structure in the map from genotypes to phenotypes. Their strength 
depends on population parameters, being highest for 'monomorphic' populations 
with low mutation rates. They can also be enhanced by additional inhomogeneities 
in the mapping from genotypes to phenotypes. We mainly investigate the effect of 
bursts using the well-studied genotype-phenotype map for RNA secondary 
structure, but find similar behaviour in a lattice protein model and in Richard 
Dawkins's biomorphs model of morphological development. Bursts can profoundly 
affect adaptive dynamics. Most notably, they imply that fitness differences play 
a smaller role in determining which phenotype fixes than would be the case for a 
Poisson process without bursts.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae085
PMID: 38693911


17. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae081. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae081.

Comparative Analysis of Maternal Gene Expression Patterns Unravels Evolutionary 
Signatures Across Reproductive Modes.

Kagan F(1), Hejnol A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Friedrich Schiller University, Institute for 
Zoology and Evolutionary Research, Jena, Germany.

Maternal genes have a pivotal role in regulating metazoan early development. As 
such their functions have been extensively studied since the dawn of 
developmental biology. The temporal and spatial dynamics of their transcripts 
have been thoroughly described in model organisms and their functions have been 
undergoing heavy investigations. Yet, less is known about the evolutionary 
changes shaping their presence within diverse oocytes. Due to their unique 
maternal inheritance pattern, a high degree is predicted to be present when it 
comes to their expression. Insofar only limited and conflicting results have 
emerged around it. Here, we set out to elucidate which evolutionary changes 
could be detected in the maternal gene expression patterns using phylogenetic 
comparative methods on RNAseq data from 43 species. Using normalized gene 
expression values and fold change information throughout early development we 
set out to find the best-fitting evolutionary model. Through modeling, we find 
evidence supporting both the high degree of divergence and constraint on gene 
expression values, together with their temporal dynamics. Furthermore, we find 
that maternal gene expression alone can be used to explain the reproductive 
modes of different species. Together, these results suggest a highly dynamic 
evolutionary landscape of maternal gene expression. We also propose a possible 
functional dichotomy of maternal genes which is influenced by the reproductive 
strategy undertaken by examined species.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae081
PMCID: PMC11091838
PMID: 38679468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae082. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae082.

Sea Anemone Membrane Attack Complex/Perforin Superfamily Demonstrates an 
Evolutionary Transitional State between Venomous and Developmental Functions.

Surm JM(1), Landau M(1), Columbus-Shenkar YY(1), Moran Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, Alexander Silberman Institute 
of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 9190401 Jerusalem, Israel.

Gene duplication is a major force driving evolutionary innovation. A classic 
example is generating new animal toxins via duplication of physiological 
protein-encoding genes and recruitment into venom. While this process drives the 
innovation of many animal venoms, reverse recruitment of toxins into nonvenomous 
cells remains unresolved. Using comparative genomics, we find members of the 
Membrane Attack Complex and Perforin Family (MAC) have been recruited into 
venom-injecting cells (cnidocytes), in soft and stony corals and sea anemones, 
suggesting that the ancestral MAC was a cnidocyte expressed toxin. Further 
investigation into the model sea anemone Nematostella vectensis reveals that 
three members have undergone Nematostella-specific duplications leading to their 
reverse recruitment into endomesodermal cells. Furthermore, simultaneous 
knockdown of all three endomesodermally expressed MACs leads to mis-development, 
supporting that these paralogs have nonvenomous function. By resolving the 
evolutionary history and function of MACs in Nematostella, we provide the first 
proof for reverse recruitment from venom to organismal development.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae082
PMCID: PMC11090067
PMID: 38676945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae080. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae080.

The Patterns of Codon Usage between Chordates and Arthropods are Different but 
Co-evolving with Mutational Biases.

Kotari I(1)(2), Kosiol C(3), Borges R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Populationsgenetik, University of Veterinary Medicine, 
Veterinärplatz 1, Vienna 1210, Austria.
(2)Vienna Graduate School of Population Genetics, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Centre for Biological Diversity, School of Biology, University of St Andrews, 
Fife KY16 9TH, UK.

Different frequencies amongst codons that encode the same amino acid (i.e. 
synonymous codons) have been observed in multiple species. Studies focused on 
uncovering the forces that drive such codon usage showed that a combined effect 
of mutational biases and translational selection works to produce different 
frequencies of synonymous codons. However, only few have been able to measure 
and distinguish between these forces that may leave similar traces on the coding 
regions. Here, we have developed a codon model that allows the disentangling of 
mutation, selection on amino acids and synonymous codons, and GC-biased gene 
conversion (gBGC) which we employed on an extensive dataset of 415 chordates and 
191 arthropods. We found that chordates need 15 more synonymous codon categories 
than arthropods to explain the empirical codon frequencies, which suggests that 
the extent of codon usage can vary greatly between animal phyla. Moreover, 
methylation at CpG sites seems to partially explain these patterns of codon 
usage in chordates but not in arthropods. Despite the differences between the 
two phyla, our findings demonstrate that in both, GC-rich codons are disfavored 
when mutations are GC-biased, and the opposite is true when mutations are 
AT-biased. This indicates that selection on the genomic coding regions might act 
primarily to stabilize its GC/AT content on a genome-wide level. Our study shows 
that the degree of synonymous codon usage varies considerably among animals, but 
is likely governed by a common underlying dynamic.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae080
PMCID: PMC11108087
PMID: 38667829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae076. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae076.

A High-Coverage Mesolithic Aurochs Genome and Effective Leveraging of Ancient 
Cattle Genomes Using Whole Genome Imputation.

Erven JAM(1)(2), Scheu A(2)(3), Verdugo MP(2), Cassidy L(2), Chen N(4), Gehlen 
B(5), Street M(6), Madsen O(7), Mullin VE(2).

Author information:
(1)Groningen Institute of Archaeology, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin D02 PN40, 
Ireland.
(3)Palaeogenetics Group, Institute of Organismic and Molecular Evolution (iOME), 
Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, 55099 Mainz, Germany.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi 
Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling 712100, China.
(5)Institute for Prehistory and Protohistory, University of Cologne, 50931 
Cologne, Germany.
(6)LEIZA, Archaeological Research Centre and Museum for Human Behavioural 
Evolution, Schloss Monrepos, D - 56567 Neuwied, Germany.
(7)Animal Breeding and Genomics, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, 
The Netherlands.

Ancient genomic analyses are often restricted to utilizing pseudohaploid data 
due to low genome coverage. Leveraging low-coverage data by imputation to 
calculate phased diploid genotypes that enables haplotype-based interrogation 
and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) calling at unsequenced positions is 
highly desirable. This has not been investigated for ancient cattle genomes 
despite these being compelling subjects for archeological, evolutionary, and 
economic reasons. Here, we test this approach by sequencing a Mesolithic 
European aurochs (18.49×; 9,852 to 9,376 calBCE) and an Early Medieval European 
cow (18.69×; 427 to 580 calCE) and combine these with published individuals: two 
ancient and three modern. We downsample these genomes (0.25×, 0.5×, 1.0×, and 
2.0×) and impute diploid genotypes, utilizing a reference panel of 171 published 
modern cattle genomes that we curated for 21.7 million (Mn) phased SNPs. We 
recover high densities of correct calls with an accuracy of >99.1% at variant 
sites for the lowest downsample depth of 0.25×, increasing to >99.5% for 2.0× 
(transversions only, minor allele frequency [MAF] ≥ 2.5%). The recovery of SNPs 
correlates with coverage; on average, 58% of sites are recovered for 0.25× 
increasing to 87% for 2.0×, utilizing an average of 3.5 million (Mn) 
transversions (MAF ≥2.5%), even in the aurochs, despite the highest temporal 
distance from the modern reference panel. Our imputed genomes behave similarly 
to directly called data in allele frequency-based analyses, for example 
consistently identifying runs of homozygosity >2 Mb, including a long homozygous 
region in the Mesolithic European aurochs.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae076
PMCID: PMC11090068
PMID: 38662789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 23:msae079. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae079. Online ahead of 
print.

The narrow footprint of ancient balancing selection revealed by heterokaryon 
incompatibility genes in Aspergillus fumigatus.

Auxier B(1), Zhang J(1), Marquez FR(1), Senden K(1), van den Heuvel J(1), Aanen 
DK(1), Snelders E(1), Debets AJM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Wageningen University & Research, the Netherlands.

In fungi, fusion between individuals leads to localized cell death, a phenomenon 
termed heterokaryon incompatibility. Generally, the genes responsible for this 
incompatibility are observed to be under balancing selection resulting from 
negative frequency-dependent selection. Here, we assess this phenomenon in 
Aspergillus fumigatus, a human pathogenic fungus with a very low level of 
linkage disequilibrium as well as an extremely high crossover rate. Using 
complementation of auxotrophic mutations as an assay for hyphal compatibility, 
we screened sexual progeny for compatibility to identify genes involved in this 
process, called het genes. In total, 5/148 (3.4%) offspring were compatible with 
a parent and 166/2142 (7.7%) sibling pairs were compatible, consistent with 
several segregating incompatibility loci. Genetic mapping identified five loci, 
four of which could be fine mapped to individual genes, of which we tested three 
through heterologous expression, confirming their causal relationship. 
Consistent with long-term balancing selection, trans-species polymorphisms were 
apparent across several sister species, as well as equal allele frequencies 
within A. fumigatus. Surprisingly, a sliding window genome-wide population-level 
analysis of an independent dataset did not show increased Tajima's D near these 
loci, in contrast to what is often found surrounding loci under balancing 
selection. Using available de novo assemblies, we show that these balanced 
polymorphisms are restricted to several hundred base pairs flanking the coding 
sequence. In addition to identifying the first het genes in an Aspergillus 
species, this work highlights the interaction of long-term balancing selection 
with rapid linkage disequilibrium decay.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae079
PMID: 38652808


22. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae071. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae071.

Synchronized Expansion and Contraction of Olfactory, Vomeronasal, and Taste 
Receptor Gene Families in Hystricomorph Rodents.

Niimura Y(1), Biswa BB(2)(3), Kishida T(4)(5), Toyoda A(6), Fujiwara K(2), Ito 
M(7), Touhara K(7), Inoue-Murayama M(8), Jenkins SH(8)(9), Adenyo C(10), Kayang 
BB(11), Koide T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Agriculture, University of 
Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.
(2)Mouse Genomics Resource Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Genetics, SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced 
Studies), Shizuoka, Japan.
(4)Curatorial Division, Museum of Natural and Environmental History, Shizuoka, 
Japan.
(5)Present address: College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon University, Fujisawa, 
Japan.
(6)Comparative Genomics Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Shizuoka, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Wildlife Research Center, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(9)Present address: Biosphere Informatics Laboratory, Department of Social 
Informatics, Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto, Japan.
(10)Livestock and Poultry Research Centre, College of Basic and Applied 
Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
(11)Department of Animal Science, College of Basic and Applied Sciences, 
University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.

Chemical senses, including olfaction, pheromones, and taste, are crucial for the 
survival of most animals. There has long been a debate about whether different 
types of senses might influence each other. For instance, primates with a strong 
sense of vision are thought to have weakened olfactory abilities, although the 
oversimplified trade-off theory is now being questioned. It is uncertain whether 
such interactions between different chemical senses occur during evolution. To 
address this question, we examined four receptor gene families related to 
olfaction, pheromones, and taste: olfactory receptor (OR), vomeronasal receptor 
type 1 and type 2 (V1R and V2R), and bitter taste receptor (T2R) genes in 
Hystricomorpha, which is morphologically and ecologically the most diverse group 
of rodents. We also sequenced and assembled the genome of the grasscutter, 
Thryonomys swinderianus. By examining 16 available genome assemblies alongside 
the grasscutter genome, we identified orthologous gene groups among 
hystricomorph rodents for these gene families to separate the gene gain and loss 
events in each phylogenetic branch of the Hystricomorpha evolutionary tree. Our 
analysis revealed that the expansion or contraction of the four gene families 
occurred synchronously, indicating that when one chemical sense develops or 
deteriorates, the others follow suit. The results also showed that V1R/V2R genes 
underwent the fastest evolution, followed by OR genes, and T2R genes were the 
most evolutionarily stable. This variation likely reflects the difference in 
ligands of V1R/V2Rs, ORs, and T2Rs: species-specific pheromones, 
environment-based scents, and toxic substances common to many animals, 
respectively.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae071
PMCID: PMC11035023
PMID: 38649162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 22:msae078. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae078. Online ahead of 
print.

The number and pattern of viral genomic reassortments are not necessarily 
identifiable from segment trees.

Lin Q(1), Goldberg EE(1), Leitner T(1), Molina-París C(1), King AA(2)(3), 
Romero-Severson EO(1).

Author information:
(1)Theoretical Biology and Biophysics, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los 
Alamos NM, USA.
(2)Center for the Study of Complex Systems and Departments of Ecology & 
Evolutionary Biology and Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI, USA.
(3)Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe NM, USA.

Reassortment is an evolutionary process common in viruses with segmented 
genomes. These viruses can swap whole genomic segments during cellular 
co-infection, giving rise to novel progeny formed from the mixture of parental 
segments. Because large-scale genome rearrangements have the potential to 
generate new phenotypes, reassortment is important to both evolutionary biology 
and public health research. However, statistical inference of the pattern of 
reassortment events from phylogenetic data is exceptionally difficult, 
potentially involving inference of general graphs in which individual segment 
trees are embedded. In this paper, we argue that, in general, the number and 
pattern of reassortment events are not identifiable from segment trees alone, 
even with theoretically ideal data. We call this fact the fundamental problem of 
reassortment, which we illustrate using the concept of the `first-infection 
tree', a typically but not always counterfactual genealogy that would have been 
observed in the segment trees had no reassortment occurred. Further, we 
illustrate four additional problems that can arise logically in the inference of 
reassortment events and show, using simulated data, that these problems are not 
rare and can potentially distort our perception of reassortment even in small 
data sets. Finally, we discuss how existing methods can be augmented or adapted 
to account for not only the fundamental problem of reassortment but also the 
four additional situations that can complicate the inference of reassortment.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae078
PMID: 38648521


24. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae077. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae077.

Computationally Efficient Demographic History Inference from Allele Frequencies 
with Supervised Machine Learning.

Tran LN(1)(2), Sun CK(2), Struck TJ(2), Sajan M(2), Gutenkunst RN(2).

Author information:
(1)Genetics Graduate Interdisciplinary Program, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ 85721, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular & Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 
85721, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Feb 15;:

Inferring past demographic history of natural populations from genomic data is 
of central concern in many studies across research fields. Previously, our group 
had developed dadi, a widely used demographic history inference method based on 
the allele frequency spectrum (AFS) and maximum composite-likelihood 
optimization. However, dadi's optimization procedure can be computationally 
expensive. Here, we present donni (demography optimization via neural network 
inference), a new inference method based on dadi that is more efficient while 
maintaining comparable inference accuracy. For each dadi-supported demographic 
model, donni simulates the expected AFS for a range of model parameters then 
trains a set of Mean Variance Estimation neural networks using the simulated 
AFS. Trained networks can then be used to instantaneously infer the model 
parameters from future genomic data summarized by an AFS. We demonstrate that 
for many demographic models, donni can infer some parameters, such as population 
size changes, very well and other parameters, such as migration rates and times 
of demographic events, fairly well. Importantly, donni provides both parameter 
and confidence interval estimates from input AFS with accuracy comparable to 
parameters inferred by dadi's likelihood optimization while bypassing its long 
and computationally intensive evaluation process. donni's performance 
demonstrates that supervised machine learning algorithms may be a promising 
avenue for developing more sustainable and computationally efficient demographic 
history inference methods.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae077
PMCID: PMC11082913
PMID: 38636507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 May 3;41(5):msae073. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae073.

Comparison of Bayesian Coalescent Skyline Plot Models for Inferring Demographic 
Histories.

Billenstein RJ(1)(2), Höhna S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)GeoBio-Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich 80333, Germany.
(2)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Paleontology & Geobiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich 80333, Germany.

Bayesian coalescent skyline plot models are widely used to infer demographic 
histories. The first (non-Bayesian) coalescent skyline plot model assumed a 
known genealogy as data, while subsequent models and implementations jointly 
inferred the genealogy and demographic history from sequence data, including 
heterochronous samples. Overall, there exist multiple different Bayesian 
coalescent skyline plot models which mainly differ in two key aspects: (i) how 
changes in population size are modeled through independent or autocorrelated 
prior distributions, and (ii) how many change-points in the demographic history 
are used, where they occur and if the number is pre-specified or inferred. The 
specific impact of each of these choices on the inferred demographic history is 
not known because of two reasons: first, not all models are implemented in the 
same software, and second, each model implementation makes specific choices that 
the biologist cannot influence. To facilitate a detailed evaluation of Bayesian 
coalescent skyline plot models, we implemented all currently described models in 
a flexible design into the software RevBayes. Furthermore, we evaluated models 
and choices on an empirical dataset of horses supplemented by a small simulation 
study. We find that estimated demographic histories can be grouped broadly into 
two groups depending on how change-points in the demographic history are 
specified (either independent of or at coalescent events). Our simulations 
suggest that models using change-points at coalescent events produce spurious 
variation near the present, while most models using independent change-points 
tend to over-smooth the inferred demographic history.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae073
PMCID: PMC11068272
PMID: 38630635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae075. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae075.

Terrestrial Birth and Body Size Tune UCP1 Functionality in Seals.

Gaudry MJ(1), Khudyakov J(2), Pirard L(3), Debier C(3), Crocker D(4), Crichton 
PG(5), Jastroch M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm 
University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA, 
USA.
(3)Louvain Institute of Biomolecular Science and Technology, Université 
catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
(4)Department of Biology, Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, CA, USA.
(5)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical School, University of East 
Anglia, Norwich, UK.

The molecular evolution of the mammalian heater protein UCP1 is a powerful 
biomarker to understand thermoregulatory strategies during species radiation 
into extreme climates, such as aquatic life with high thermal conductivity. 
While fully aquatic mammals lost UCP1, most semiaquatic seals display intact 
UCP1 genes, apart from large elephant seals. Here, we show that UCP1 thermogenic 
activity of the small-bodied harbor seal is equally potent compared to 
terrestrial orthologs, emphasizing its importance for neonatal survival on land. 
In contrast, elephant seal UCP1 does not display thermogenic activity, not even 
when translating a repaired or a recently highlighted truncated version. Thus, 
the thermogenic benefits for neonatal survival during terrestrial birth in 
semiaquatic pinnipeds maintained evolutionary selection pressure on UCP1 
function and were only outweighed by extreme body sizes among elephant seals, 
fully eliminating UCP1-dependent thermogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae075
PMCID: PMC11050727
PMID: 38606905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest We disclose no competing 
interests.


27. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae074. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae074.

Phased Assembly of Neo-Sex Chromosomes Reveals Extensive Y Degeneration and 
Rapid Genome Evolution in Rumex hastatulus.

Sacchi B(1), Humphries Z(1), Kružlicová J(2)(3), Bodláková M(2), Pyne C(1), 
Choudhury BI(1)(4), Gong Y(5), Bačovský V(2), Hobza R(2), Barrett SCH(1), Wright 
SI(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(2)Department of Plant Developmental Genetics, Institute of Biophysics of the 
Czech Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, Canada.
(5)Centre for Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.

Y chromosomes are thought to undergo progressive degeneration due to stepwise 
loss of recombination and subsequent reduction in selection efficiency. However, 
the timescales and evolutionary forces driving degeneration remain unclear. To 
investigate the evolution of sex chromosomes on multiple timescales, we 
generated a high-quality phased genome assembly of the massive older (<10 MYA) 
and neo (<200,000 yr) sex chromosomes in the XYY cytotype of the dioecious plant 
Rumex hastatulus and a hermaphroditic outgroup Rumex salicifolius. Our 
assemblies, supported by fluorescence in situ hybridization, confirmed that the 
neo-sex chromosomes were formed by two key events: an X-autosome fusion and a 
reciprocal translocation between the homologous autosome and the Y chromosome. 
The enormous sex-linked regions of the X (296 Mb) and two Y chromosomes (503 Mb) 
both evolved from large repeat-rich genomic regions with low recombination; 
however, the complete loss of recombination on the Y still led to over 30% gene 
loss and major rearrangements. In the older sex-linked region, there has been a 
significant increase in transposable element abundance, even into and near 
genes. In the neo-sex-linked regions, we observed evidence of extensive 
rearrangements without gene degeneration and loss. Overall, we inferred 
significant degeneration during the first 10 million years of Y chromosome 
evolution but not on very short timescales. Our results indicate that even when 
sex chromosomes emerge from repetitive regions of already-low recombination, the 
complete loss of recombination on the Y chromosome still leads to a substantial 
increase in repetitive element content and gene degeneration.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae074
PMCID: PMC11057207
PMID: 38606901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae056. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae056.

Viral Receptor-Binding Protein Evolves New Function through Mutations That Cause 
Trimer Instability and Functional Heterogeneity.

Strobel HM(1), Labador SD(1), Basu D(2)(3), Sane M(1), Corbett KD(1)(3), Meyer 
JR(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

When proteins evolve new activity, a concomitant decrease in stability is often 
observed because the mutations that confer new activity can destabilize the 
native fold. In the conventional model of protein evolution, reduced stability 
is considered a purely deleterious cost of molecular innovation because unstable 
proteins are prone to aggregation and are sensitive to environmental stressors. 
However, recent work has revealed that nonnative, often unstable protein 
conformations play an important role in mediating evolutionary transitions, 
raising the question of whether instability can itself potentiate the evolution 
of new activity. We explored this question in a bacteriophage receptor-binding 
protein during host-range evolution. We studied the properties of the 
receptor-binding protein of bacteriophage λ before and after host-range 
evolution and demonstrated that the evolved protein is relatively unstable and 
may exist in multiple conformations with unique receptor preferences. Through a 
combination of structural modeling and in vitro oligomeric state analysis, we 
found that the instability arises from mutations that interfere with trimer 
formation. This study raises the intriguing possibility that protein instability 
might play a previously unrecognized role in mediating host-range expansions in 
viruses.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae056
PMCID: PMC10999833
PMID: 38586942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 5:msae070. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae070. Online ahead of 
print.

fastDFE: fast and flexible inference of the distribution of fitness effects.

Sendrowski J(1), Bataillon T(1).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Research Center, Aarhus University, Denmark.

Estimating the distribution of fitness effects (DFE) of new mutations is of 
fundamental importance in evolutionary biology, ecology, and conservation. 
However, existing methods for DFE estimation suffer from limitations, such as 
slow computation speed and limited scalability. To address these issues, we 
introduce fastDFE, a Python-based software package, offering fast and flexible 
DFE inference from site-frequency spectrum (SFS) data. Apart from providing 
efficient joint inference of multiple DFEs that share parameters, it offers the 
feature of introducing genomic covariates that influence the DFEs, and testing 
their significance. To further simplify usage, fastDFE is equipped with 
comprehensive VCF-to-SFS parsing utilities. These include options for site 
filtering and stratification, as well as site-degeneracy annotation and 
probabilistic ancestral-allele inference. fastDFE thereby covers the entire 
workflow of DFE inference from the moment of acquiring a raw VCF file. Despite 
its Python foundation, fastDFE incorporates a full R interface, including native 
R visualization capabilities. The package is comprehensively tested, and 
documented at fastdfe.readthedocs.io.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae070
PMID: 38577958


30. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae068. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae068.

Earl Grey: A Fully Automated User-Friendly Transposable Element Annotation and 
Analysis Pipeline.

Baril T(1)(2), Galbraith J(1)(3), Hayward A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, 
Cornwall TR10 9FE, UK.
(2)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics, Institute of Biology, University of 
Neuchâtel, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 
3FL, UK.

Transposable elements (TEs) are major components of eukaryotic genomes and are 
implicated in a range of evolutionary processes. Yet, TE annotation and 
characterization remain challenging, particularly for nonspecialists, since 
existing pipelines are typically complicated to install, run, and extract data 
from. Current methods of automated TE annotation are also subject to issues that 
reduce overall quality, particularly (i) fragmented and overlapping TE 
annotations, leading to erroneous estimates of TE count and coverage, and (ii) 
repeat models represented by short sections of total TE length, with poor 
capture of 5' and 3' ends. To address these issues, we present Earl Grey, a 
fully automated TE annotation pipeline designed for user-friendly curation and 
annotation of TEs in eukaryotic genome assemblies. Using nine simulated genomes 
and an annotation of Drosophila melanogaster, we show that Earl Grey outperforms 
current widely used TE annotation methodologies in ameliorating the issues 
mentioned above while scoring highly in benchmarking for TE annotation and 
classification and being robust across genomic contexts. Earl Grey provides a 
comprehensive and fully automated TE annotation toolkit that provides 
researchers with paper-ready summary figures and outputs in standard formats 
compatible with other bioinformatics tools. Earl Grey has a modular format, with 
great scope for the inclusion of additional modules focused on further quality 
control and tailored analyses in future releases.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae068
PMCID: PMC11003543
PMID: 38577785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


31. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae049. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae049.

Diversity and Evolution of Frog Visual Opsins: Spectral Tuning and Adaptation to 
Distinct Light Environments.

Schott RK(1)(2), Fujita MK(3), Streicher JW(4), Gower DJ(4), Thomas KN(3)(4), 
Loew ER(5), Bamba Kaya AG(6), Bittencourt-Silva GB(4), Guillherme Becker C(7), 
Cisneros-Heredia D(8), Clulow S(9), Davila M(8), Firneno TJ Jr(10), Haddad 
CFB(11), Janssenswillen S(12), Labisko J(4)(13)(14), Maddock ST(4)(14)(15), 
Mahony M(16), Martins RA(17), Michaels CJ(18), Mitchell NJ(19), Portik DM(20), 
Prates I(21), Roelants K(12), Roelke C(3), Tobi E(22), Woolfolk M(2)(23), Bell 
RC(2)(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Centre for Vision Research, York University, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Vertebrate Zoology, National Museum of Natural History, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Amphibian and Reptile Diversity Research Center, The 
University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX, USA.
(4)Natural History Museum, London, UK.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(6)Institute de Recherches Agronomiques et Forestières, Libreville, Gabon.
(7)Department of Biology and One Health Microbiome Center, Center for Infectious 
Disease Dynamics, The Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania 
State University, University Park, PA, USA.
(8)Laboratorio de Zoología Terrestre, Instituto de Biodiversidad Tropical 
IBIOTROP, Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y Ambientales, Universidad San 
Francisco de Quito USFQ, Quito, Ecuador.
(9)Centre for Conservation Ecology and Genomics, Institute for Applied Ecology, 
University of Canberra, Bruce, ACT, Australia.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Denver, Denver, USA.
(11)Department of Biodiversity and Center of Aquaculture-CAUNESP, I.B., São 
Paulo State University, Rio Claro, São Paulo, Brazil.
(12)Amphibian Evolution Lab, Biology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(13)Centre for Biodiversity and Environment Research, Department of Genetics, 
Evolution and Environment, University College London, London, UK.
(14)Island Biodiversity and Conservation Centre, University of Seychelles, Mahé, 
Seychelles.
(15)School of Natural and Environmental Sciences, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.
(16)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Newcastle, Newcastle 
2308, Australia.
(17)Programa de Pós-graduação em Conservação da Fauna, Universidade Federal de 
São Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil.
(18)Independent Scholar, London, UK.
(19)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, 
WA 6009, Australia.
(20)Department of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(21)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(22)Gabon Biodiversity Program, Center for Conservation and Sustainability, 
Smithsonian National Zoo and Conservation Biology Institute, Gamba, Gabon.
(23)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Museum of Comparative 
Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Visual systems adapt to different light environments through several avenues 
including optical changes to the eye and neurological changes in how light 
signals are processed and interpreted. Spectral sensitivity can evolve via 
changes to visual pigments housed in the retinal photoreceptors through gene 
duplication and loss, differential and coexpression, and sequence evolution. 
Frogs provide an excellent, yet understudied, system for visual evolution 
research due to their diversity of ecologies (including biphasic 
aquatic-terrestrial life cycles) that we hypothesize imposed different selective 
pressures leading to adaptive evolution of the visual system, notably the opsins 
that encode the protein component of the visual pigments responsible for the 
first step in visual perception. Here, we analyze the diversity and evolution of 
visual opsin genes from 93 new eye transcriptomes plus published data for a 
combined dataset spanning 122 frog species and 34 families. We find that most 
species express the four visual opsins previously identified in frogs but show 
evidence for gene loss in two lineages. Further, we present evidence of positive 
selection in three opsins and shifts in selective pressures associated with 
differences in habitat and life history, but not activity pattern. We identify 
substantial novel variation in the visual opsins and, using 
microspectrophotometry, find highly variable spectral sensitivities, expanding 
known ranges for all frog visual pigments. Mutations at spectral-tuning sites 
only partially account for this variation, suggesting that frogs have used 
tuning pathways that are unique among vertebrates. These results support the 
hypothesis of adaptive evolution in photoreceptor physiology across the frog 
tree of life in response to varying environmental and ecological factors and 
further our growing understanding of vertebrate visual evolution.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae049
PMCID: PMC10994157
PMID: 38573520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae066. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae066.

Inter-species Transcriptomic Analysis Reveals a Constitutive Adaptation Against 
Oxidative Stress for the Highly Virulent Leptospira Species.

Giraud-Gatineau A(1), Ayachit G(2), Nieves C(2), Dagbo KC(2), Bourhy K(2), 
Pulido F(2), Huete SG(1), Benaroudj N(1), Picardeau M(1), Veyrier FJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Department, Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Biology of 
Spirochetes Unit, Paris, France.
(2)INRS-Centre Armand-Frappier Santé Biotechnologie, Bacterial Symbionts 
Evolution, Laval, Quebec H7V 1B7, Canada.

Transcriptomic analyses across large scales of evolutionary distance have great 
potential to shed light on regulatory evolution but are complicated by 
difficulties in establishing orthology and limited availability of accessible 
software. We introduce here a method and a graphical user interface wrapper, 
called Annotator-RNAtor, for performing interspecies transcriptomic analysis and 
studying intragenus evolution. The pipeline uses third-party software to infer 
homologous genes in various species and highlight differences in the expression 
of the core-genes. To illustrate the methodology and demonstrate its usefulness, 
we focus on the emergence of the highly virulent Leptospira subclade known as 
P1+, which includes the causative agents of leptospirosis. Here, we expand on 
the genomic study through the comparison of transcriptomes between species from 
P1+ and their related P1- counterparts (low-virulent pathogens). In doing so, we 
shed light on differentially expressed pathways and focused on describing a 
specific example of adaptation based on a differential expression of 
PerRA-controlled genes. We showed that P1+ species exhibit higher expression of 
the katE gene, a well-known virulence determinant in pathogenic Leptospira 
species correlated with greater tolerance to peroxide. Switching PerRA alleles 
between P1+ and P1- species demonstrated that the lower repression of katE and 
greater tolerance to peroxide in P1+ species was solely controlled by PerRA and 
partly caused by a PerRA amino-acid permutation. Overall, these results 
demonstrate the strategic fit of the methodology and its ability to decipher 
adaptive transcriptomic changes, not observable by comparative genome analysis, 
that may have been implicated in the emergence of these pathogens.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae066
PMCID: PMC11021026
PMID: 38573174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae039. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae039.

Correction to: Mapping and Functional Dissection of the Rumpless Trait in Piao 
Chicken Identifies a Causal Loss of Function Mutation in the Novel Gene Rum.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae039
PMCID: PMC10980512
PMID: 38552246


34. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae058. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae058.

Multiomics Analyses Provide New Insight into Genetic Variation of Reproductive 
Adaptability in Tibetan Sheep.

Han B(1)(2)(3), Tian D(1)(3), Li X(1)(3), Liu S(1)(3), Tian F(1)(3), Liu 
D(1)(2)(3), Wang S(1)(2)(3), Zhao K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest 
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Qinghai Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Ecological Genomics, Northwest 
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, China.

Domestication and artificial selection during production-oriented breeding have 
greatly shaped the level of genomic variability in sheep. However, the genetic 
variation associated with increased reproduction remains elusive. Here, two 
groups of samples from consecutively monotocous and polytocous sheep were 
collected for genome-wide association, transcriptomic, proteomic, and 
metabolomic analyses to explore the genetic variation in fecundity in Tibetan 
sheep. Genome-wide association study revealed strong associations between BMPR1B 
(p.Q249R) and litter size, as well as between PAPPA and lambing interval; these 
findings were validated in 1,130 individuals. Furthermore, we constructed the 
first single-cell atlas of Tibetan sheep ovary tissues and identified a specific 
mural granulosa cell subtype with PAPPA-specific expression and differential 
expression of BMPR1B between the two groups. Bulk RNA-seq indicated that BMPR1B 
and PAPPA expressions were similar between the two groups of sheep. 3D protein 
structure prediction and coimmunoprecipitation analysis indicated that mutation 
and mutually exclusive exons of BMPR1B are the main mechanisms for prolific 
Tibetan sheep. We propose that PAPPA is a key gene for stimulating ovarian 
follicular growth and development, and steroidogenesis. Our work reveals the 
genetic variation in reproductive performance in Tibetan sheep, providing 
insights and valuable genetic resources for the discovery of genes and 
regulatory mechanisms that improve reproductive success.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae058
PMCID: PMC10980521
PMID: 38552245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.


35. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae017. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae017.

Ancient Genomes From Bronze Age Remains Reveal Deep Diversity and Recent 
Adaptive Episodes for Human Oral Pathobionts.

Jackson I(1)(2), Woodman P(3), Dowd M(4), Fibiger L(5), Cassidy LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
(2)The SFI Centre for Research Training in Genomics Data Science, University of 
Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(3)Department of Archaeology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(4)Faculty of Science, Atlantic Technological University, Sligo, Ireland.
(5)School of History, Classics and Archaeology, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh EH8 9AG, UK.

Ancient microbial genomes can illuminate pathobiont evolution across millenia, 
with teeth providing a rich substrate. However, the characterization of 
prehistoric oral pathobiont diversity is limited. In Europe, only 
preagricultural genomes have been subject to phylogenetic analysis, with none 
compared to more recent archaeological periods. Here, we report well-preserved 
microbiomes from two 4,000-year-old teeth from an Irish limestone cave. These 
contained bacteria implicated in periodontitis, as well as Streptococcus mutans, 
the major cause of caries and rare in the ancient genomic record. Despite 
deriving from the same individual, these teeth produced divergent Tannerella 
forsythia genomes, indicating higher levels of strain diversity in prehistoric 
populations. We find evidence of microbiome dysbiosis, with a disproportionate 
quantity of S. mutans sequences relative to other oral streptococci. This high 
abundance allowed for metagenomic assembly, resulting in its first reported 
ancient genome. Phylogenetic analysis indicates major postmedieval population 
expansions for both species, highlighting the inordinate impact of recent 
dietary changes. In T. forsythia, this expansion is associated with the 
replacement of older lineages, possibly reflecting a genome-wide selective 
sweep. Accordingly, we see dramatic changes in T. forsythia's virulence 
repertoire across this period. S. mutans shows a contrasting pattern, with 
deeply divergent lineages persisting in modern populations. This may be due to 
its highly recombining nature, allowing for maintenance of diversity through 
selective episodes. Nonetheless, an explosion in recent coalescences and 
significantly shorter branch lengths separating bacteriocin-carrying strains 
indicate major changes in S. mutans demography and function coinciding with 
sugar popularization during the industrial period.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae017
PMCID: PMC10966897
PMID: 38533900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no 
competing interests.


36. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae067. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae067.

Emergence of an Orphan Nitrogenase Protein Following Atmospheric Oxygenation.

Cuevas-Zuviría B(1), Garcia AK(1), Rivier AJ(1), Rucker HR(1), Carruthers BM(1), 
Kaçar B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 
USA.

Molecular innovations within key metabolisms can have profound impacts on 
element cycling and ecological distribution. Yet, much of the molecular 
foundations of early evolved enzymes and metabolisms are unknown. Here, we bring 
one such mystery to relief by probing the birth and evolution of the G-subunit 
protein, an integral component of certain members of the nitrogenase family, the 
only enzymes capable of biological nitrogen fixation. The G-subunit is a 
Paleoproterozoic-age orphan protein that appears more than 1 billion years after 
the origin of nitrogenases. We show that the G-subunit arose with novel 
nitrogenase metal dependence and the ecological expansion of nitrogen-fixing 
microbes following the transition in environmental metal availabilities and 
atmospheric oxygenation that began ∼2.5 billion years ago. We identify molecular 
features that suggest early G-subunit proteins mediated cofactor or protein 
interactions required for novel metal dependency, priming ancient nitrogenases 
and their hosts to exploit these newly diversified geochemical environments. We 
further examined the degree of functional specialization in G-subunit evolution 
with extant and ancestral homologs using laboratory reconstruction experiments. 
Our results indicate that permanent recruitment of the orphan protein depended 
on the prior establishment of conserved molecular features and showcase how 
contingent evolutionary novelties might shape ecologically important microbial 
innovations.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae067
PMCID: PMC11018506
PMID: 38526235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


37. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae065. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae065.

The Origin and Evolution of Sex Peptide and Sex Peptide Receptor Interactions.

Peng J(1), Svetec N(1), Molina H(2), Zhao L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics and Genomics, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY, USA.
(2)Proteomics Resource Center, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Feb 23;:

Post-mating responses play a vital role in successful reproduction across 
diverse species. In fruit flies, sex peptide binds to the sex peptide receptor, 
triggering a series of post-mating responses. However, the origin of sex peptide 
receptor predates the emergence of sex peptide. The evolutionary origins of the 
interactions between sex peptide and sex peptide receptor and the mechanisms by 
which they interact remain enigmatic. In this study, we used ancestral sequence 
reconstruction, AlphaFold2 predictions, and molecular dynamics simulations to 
study sex peptide-sex peptide receptor interactions and their origination. Using 
AlphaFold2 and long-time molecular dynamics simulations, we predicted the 
structure and dynamics of sex peptide-sex peptide receptor interactions. We show 
that sex peptide potentially binds to the ancestral states of Diptera sex 
peptide receptor. Notably, we found that only a few amino acid changes in sex 
peptide receptor are sufficient for the formation of sex peptide-sex peptide 
receptor interactions. Ancestral sequence reconstruction and molecular dynamics 
simulations further reveal that sex peptide receptor interacts with sex peptide 
through residues that are mostly involved in the interaction interface of an 
ancestral ligand, myoinhibitory peptides. We propose a potential mechanism 
whereby sex peptide-sex peptide receptor interactions arise from the preexisting 
myoinhibitory peptides-sex peptide receptor interface as well as early chance 
events both inside and outside the preexisting interface that created novel sex 
peptide-specific sex peptide-sex peptide receptor interactions. Our findings 
provide new insights into the origin and evolution of sex peptide-sex peptide 
receptor interactions and their relationship with myoinhibitory peptides-sex 
peptide receptor interactions.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae065
PMCID: PMC11017328
PMID: 38518286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae063. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae063.

Multiple Genomic Landscapes of Recombination and Genomic Divergence in Wild 
Populations of House Mice-The Role of Chromosomal Fusions and Prdm9.

Marín-García C(1)(2), Álvarez-González L(1)(2), Marín-Gual L(1)(2), Casillas 
S(2)(3), Picón J(1)(2), Yam K(1)(2), Garcias-Ramis MM(1)(2), Vara C(1)(2), 
Ventura J(4)(5), Ruiz-Herrera A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Biologia Cel·lular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès 08193, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès 08193, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Departament de Genètica i Microbiologia, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Cerdanyola del Vallès 08193, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Departament de Biologia Animal, Biologia Vegetal i Ecologia, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès 08193, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Small Mammals Research Unit, Granollers Museum of Natural Sciences, 
Granollers 08402, Barcelona, Spain.

Chromosomal fusions represent one of the most common types of chromosomal 
rearrangements found in nature. Yet, their role in shaping the genomic landscape 
of recombination and hence genome evolution remains largely unexplored. Here, we 
take advantage of wild mice populations with chromosomal fusions to evaluate the 
effect of this type of structural variant on genomic landscapes of recombination 
and divergence. To this aim, we combined cytological analysis of meiotic 
crossovers in primary spermatocytes with inferred analysis of recombination 
rates based on linkage disequilibrium using single nucleotide polymorphisms. Our 
results suggest the presence of a combined effect of Robertsonian fusions and 
Prdm9 allelic background, a gene involved in the formation of meiotic double 
strand breaks and postzygotic reproductive isolation, in reshaping genomic 
landscapes of recombination. We detected a chromosomal redistribution of meiotic 
recombination toward telomeric regions in metacentric chromosomes in mice with 
Robertsonian fusions when compared to nonfused mice. This repatterning was 
accompanied by increased levels of crossover interference and reduced levels of 
estimated recombination rates between populations, together with high levels of 
genomic divergence. Interestingly, we detected that Prdm9 allelic background was 
a major determinant of recombination rates at the population level, whereas 
Robertsonian fusions showed limited effects, restricted to centromeric regions 
of fused chromosomes. Altogether, our results provide new insights into the 
effect of Robertsonian fusions and Prdm9 background on meiotic recombination.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae063
PMCID: PMC10991077
PMID: 38513632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae064. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae064.

Genomic Diversity in the Endosymbiotic Bacteria of Human Head Lice.

Boyd BM(1), House N(2)(3), Carduck CW(1), Reed DL(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biological Data Science, Life Sciences, Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Nevada Reno, Reno, NV, USA.
(3)Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
USA.

Insects have repeatedly forged symbioses with heritable microbes, gaining novel 
traits. For the microbe, the transition to symbioses can lead to the 
degeneration of the symbiont's genome through transmission bottlenecks, 
isolation, and the loss of DNA repair enzymes. However, some insect-microbial 
symbioses have persisted for millions of years, suggesting that natural 
selection slows genetic drift and maintains functional consistency between 
symbiont populations. By sampling in multiple countries, we examine genomic 
diversity within a symbiont species, a heritable symbiotic bacterium found only 
in human head lice. We find that human head louse symbionts contain genetic 
diversity that appears to have arisen contemporaneously with the appearance of 
anatomically modern humans within Africa and/or during the colonization of 
Eurasia by humans. We predict that the observed genetic diversity underlies 
functional differences in extant symbiont lineages, through the inactivation of 
genes involved in symbiont membrane construction. Furthermore, we find evidence 
of additional gene losses prior to the appearance of modern humans, also 
impacting the symbiont membrane. From this, we conclude that symbiont genome 
degeneration is proceeding, via gene inactivation and subsequent loss, in human 
head louse symbionts, while genomic diversity is maintained. Collectively, our 
results provide a look into the genomic diversity within a single symbiont 
species and highlight the shared evolutionary history of humans, lice, and 
bacteria.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae064
PMCID: PMC10986857
PMID: 38513084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae061. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae061.

The Diverse Evolutionary Histories of Domesticated Metaviral Capsid Genes in 
Mammals.

Henriques WS(1), Young JM(2), Nemudryi A(1), Nemudraia A(1), Wiedenheft B(1), 
Malik HS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Montana State University, 
Bozeman, MT 59717, USA.
(2)Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 98109, 
USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Sep 17;:

Selfish genetic elements comprise significant fractions of mammalian genomes. In 
rare instances, host genomes domesticate segments of these elements for 
function. Using a complete human genome assembly and 25 additional vertebrate 
genomes, we re-analyzed the evolutionary trajectories and functional potential 
of capsid (CA) genes domesticated from Metaviridae, a lineage of retrovirus-like 
retrotransposons. Our study expands on previous analyses to unearth several new 
insights about the evolutionary histories of these ancient genes. We find that 
at least five independent domestication events occurred from diverse 
Metaviridae, giving rise to three universally retained single-copy genes 
evolving under purifying selection and two gene families unique to placental 
mammals, with multiple members showing evidence of rapid evolution. In the 
SIRH/RTL family, we find diverse amino-terminal domains, widespread loss of 
protein-coding capacity in RTL10 despite its retention in several mammalian 
lineages, and differential utilization of an ancient programmed ribosomal 
frameshift in RTL3 between the domesticated CA and protease domains. Our 
analyses also reveal that most members of the PNMA family in mammalian genomes 
encode a conserved putative amino-terminal RNA-binding domain (RBD) both 
adjoining and independent from domesticated CA domains. Our analyses lead to a 
significant correction of previous annotations of the essential CCDC8 gene. We 
show that this putative RBD is also present in several extant Metaviridae, 
revealing a novel protein domain configuration in retrotransposons. 
Collectively, our study reveals the divergent outcomes of multiple domestication 
events from diverse Metaviridae in the common ancestor of placental mammals.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae061
PMCID: PMC11011659
PMID: 38507667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae060. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae060.

Correlated Allele Frequency Changes Reveal Clonal Structure and Selection in 
Temporal Genetic Data.

Li Y(1), Barton JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Riverside, CA 
92521, USA.
(2)Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.

In evolving populations where the rate of beneficial mutations is large, 
subpopulations of individuals with competing beneficial mutations can be 
maintained over long times. Evolution with this kind of clonal structure is 
commonly observed in a wide range of microbial and viral populations. However, 
it can be difficult to completely resolve clonal dynamics in data. This is due 
to limited read lengths in high-throughput sequencing methods, which are often 
insufficient to directly measure linkage disequilibrium or determine clonal 
structure. Here, we develop a method to infer clonal structure using correlated 
allele frequency changes in time-series sequence data. Simulations show that our 
method recovers true, underlying clonal structures when they are known and 
accurately estimate linkage disequilibrium. This information can then be 
combined with other inference methods to improve estimates of the fitness 
effects of individual mutations. Applications to data suggest novel clonal 
structures in an E. coli long-term evolution experiment, and yield improved 
predictions of the effects of mutations on bacterial fitness and antibiotic 
resistance. Moreover, our method is computationally efficient, requiring orders 
of magnitude less run time for large data sets than existing methods. Overall, 
our method provides a powerful tool to infer clonal structures from data sets 
where only allele frequencies are available, which can also improve downstream 
analyses.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae060
PMCID: PMC10986812
PMID: 38507665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest None declared.


42. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae062. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae062.

Ancient Mitogenomes Reveal the Maternal Genetic History of East Asian Dogs.

Zhang M(1)(2), Song Y(3), Wang C(1), Sun G(4), Zhuang L(5), Guo M(5), Ren L(6), 
Wangdue S(7), Dong G(8), Dai Q(2), Cao P(2), Yang R(2), Liu F(2), Feng X(2), 
Bennett EA(2), Zhang X(2), Chen X(9), Wang F(3), Luan F(3), Dong W(10), Lu G(3), 
Hao D(10), Hou H(11), Wang H(11)(12), Qiao H(13), Wang Z(13), Hu X(13), He W(7), 
Xi L(14), Wang W(15), Shao J(14), Sun Z(14), Yue L(14), Ding Y(14), Tashi N(7), 
Tsho Y(7), Tong Y(7), Yang Y(16), Zhu S(2)(17), Miao B(2), Wang W(2)(18), Zhang 
L(2), Hu S(19)(14), Ni X(2)(17), Fu Q(2)(17).

Author information:
(1)China-Central Asia "the Belt and Road" Joint Laboratory on Human and 
Environment Research, Key Laboratory of Cultural Heritage Research and 
Conservation, School of Culture Heritage, Northwest University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Vertebrate Evolution and Human Origins, Institute of 
Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Center for Excellence in Life and 
Paleoenvironment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)School of Archaeology, Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(4)Zhejiang Provincial Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeology, Hangzhou, 
China.
(5)National Museum of China, Beijing, China.
(6)School of History and Culture, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(7)Tibet Institute for Conservation and Research of Cultural Relics, Lhasa, 
China.
(8)Key Laboratory of Western China's Environmental Systems (Ministry of 
Education), College of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, China.
(9)Department of Cultural Heritage and Museology, Nanjing Normal University, 
Nanjing, China.
(10)Shandong Provincial Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeology, Jinan, 
China.
(11)Gansu Provincial Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeology, Lanzhou, 
China.
(12)Fudan Archaeological Science Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(13)Qinghai Provincial Cultural Relics and Archaeology Institute, Xining, China.
(14)Shaanxi Academy of Archaeology, Xi'an, China.
(15)School of Archaeology and Museology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China.
(16)School of Ecological and Environmental Sciences, East China Normal 
University, Shanghai, China.
(17)University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(18)Science and Technology Archaeology, National Centre for Archaeology, 
Beijing, China.
(19)Joint International Research Laboratory of Environmental and Social 
Archaeology, Shandong University, Qingdao, China.

Recent studies have suggested that dogs were domesticated during the Last 
Glacial Maximum (LGM) in Siberia, which contrasts with previous proposed 
domestication centers (e.g. Europe, the Middle East, and East Asia). Ancient DNA 
provides a powerful resource for the study of mammalian evolution and has been 
widely used to understand the genetic history of domestic animals. To understand 
the maternal genetic history of East Asian dogs, we have made a complete 
mitogenome dataset of 120 East Asian canids from 38 archaeological sites, 
including 102 newly sequenced from 12.9 to 1 ka BP (1,000 years before present). 
The majority (112/119, 94.12%) belonged to haplogroup A, and half of these 
(55/112, 49.11%) belonged to sub-haplogroup A1b. Most existing mitochondrial 
haplogroups were present in ancient East Asian dogs. However, mitochondrial 
lineages in ancient northern dogs (northeastern Eurasia and northern East Asia) 
were deeper and older than those in southern East Asian dogs. Results suggests 
that East Asian dogs originated from northeastern Eurasian populations after the 
LGM, dispersing in two possible directions after domestication. Western Eurasian 
(Europe and the Middle East) dog maternal ancestries genetically influenced East 
Asian dogs from approximately 4 ka BP, dramatically increasing after 3 ka BP, 
and afterwards largely replaced most primary maternal lineages in northern East 
Asia. Additionally, at least three major mitogenome sub-haplogroups of 
haplogroup A (A1a, A1b, and A3) reveal at least two major dispersal waves onto 
the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau in ancient times, indicating eastern (A1b and A3) and 
western (A1a) Eurasian origins.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae062
PMCID: PMC11003542
PMID: 38507661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
competing interests.


43. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae059. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae059.

Adaptation in Unstable Environments and Global Gene Losses: Small but Stable 
Gene Networks by the May-Wigner Theory.

Xu S(1)(2), Shao S(1), Feng X(1), Li S(1), Zhang L(1), Wu W(1), Liu M(1), Tracy 
ME(1), Zhong C(3), Guo Z(1), Wu CI(1), Shi S(1), He Z(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Plant Resources, School of Life Sciences, Southern Marine Science and 
Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(2)School of Ecology, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Institute of Wetland Research, Hainan Academy of Forestry (Hainan Academy of 
Mangrove), Haikou, China.

Although gene loss is common in evolution, it remains unclear whether it is an 
adaptive process. In a survey of seven major mangrove clades that are woody 
plants in the intertidal zones of daily environmental perturbations, we noticed 
that they generally evolved reduced gene numbers. We then focused on the largest 
clade of Rhizophoreae and observed the continual gene set reduction in each of 
the eight species. A great majority of gene losses are concentrated on 
environmental interaction processes, presumably to cope with the constant 
fluctuations in the tidal environments. Genes of the general processes for woody 
plants are largely retained. In particular, fewer gene losses are found in 
physiological traits such as viviparous seeds, high salinity, and high tannin 
content. Given the broad and continual genome reductions, we propose the 
May-Wigner theory (MWT) of system stability as a possible mechanism. In MWT, the 
most effective solution for buffering continual perturbations is to reduce the 
size of the system (or to weaken the total genic interactions). Mangroves are 
unique as immovable inhabitants of the compound environments in the land-sea 
interface, where environmental gradients (such as salinity) fluctuate 
constantly, often drastically. Extending MWT to gene regulatory network (GRN), 
computer simulations and transcriptome analyses support the stabilizing effects 
of smaller gene sets in mangroves vis-à-vis inland plants. In summary, we show 
the adaptive significance of gene losses in mangrove plants, including the 
specific role of promoting phenotype innovation and a general role in 
stabilizing GRN in unstable environments as predicted by MWT.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae059
PMCID: PMC10991078
PMID: 38507653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


44. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae057. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae057.

scalepopgen: Bioinformatic Workflow Resources Implemented in Nextflow for 
Comprehensive Population Genomic Analyses.

Upadhyay M(1), Pogorevc N(1), Medugorac I(1).

Author information:
(1)Population Genomics Group, Department of Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich, 
Martinsried 82152, Germany.

Population genomic analyses such as inference of population structure and 
identifying signatures of selection usually involve the application of a 
plethora of tools. The installation of tools and their dependencies, data 
transformation, or series of data preprocessing in a particular order sometimes 
makes the analyses challenging. While the usage of container-based technologies 
has significantly resolved the problems associated with the installation of 
tools and their dependencies, population genomic analyses requiring multistep 
pipelines or complex data transformation can greatly be facilitated by the 
application of workflow management systems such as Nextflow and Snakemake. Here, 
we present scalepopgen, a collection of fully automated workflows that can carry 
out widely used population genomic analyses on the biallelic single nucleotide 
polymorphism data stored in either variant calling format files or the 
plink-generated binary files. scalepopgen is developed in Nextflow and can be 
run locally or on high-performance computing systems using either Conda, 
Singularity, or Docker. The automated workflow includes procedures such as (i) 
filtering of individuals and genotypes; (ii) principal component analysis, 
admixture with identifying optimal K-values; (iii) running TreeMix analysis with 
or without bootstrapping and migration edges, followed by identification of an 
optimal number of migration edges; (iv) implementing single-population and 
pair-wise population comparison-based procedures to identify genomic signatures 
of selection. The pipeline uses various open-source tools; additionally, several 
Python and R scripts are also provided to collect and visualize the results. The 
tool is freely available at https://github.com/Popgen48/scalepopgen.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae057
PMCID: PMC10994858
PMID: 38507648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae055. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae055.

Fermentation Practices Select for Thermostable Endolysins in Phages.

Oechslin F(1)(2)(3), Zhu X(1)(2), Morency C(1)(2)(3), Somerville V(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Shi R(1)(2), Moineau S(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Département de biochimie, de microbiologie, et de bio-informatique, Faculté 
des sciences et de génie, Université Laval, Québec City, Canada.
(2)Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes (IBIS), Pavillon 
Charles-Eugène-Marchand, Université Laval, Quebec City, Canada.
(3)Groupe de recherche en écologie buccale, Faculté de médecine dentaire, 
Université Laval, Québec City, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Félix d'Hérelle Reference Center for Bacterial Viruses, Université Laval, 
Québec City, Canada.

Endolysins are produced by (bacterio)phages and play a crucial role in degrading 
the bacterial cell wall and the subsequent release of new phage progeny. These 
lytic enzymes exhibit a remarkable diversity, often occurring in a multimodular 
form that combines different catalytic and cell wall-binding domains, even in 
phages infecting the same species. Yet, our current understanding lacks insight 
into how environmental factors and ecological niches may have influenced the 
evolution of these enzymes. In this study, we focused on phages infecting 
Streptococcus thermophilus, as this bacterial species has a well-defined and 
narrow ecological niche, namely, dairy fermentation. Among the endolysins found 
in phages targeting this species, we observed limited diversity, with a singular 
structural type dominating in most of identified S. thermophilus phages. Within 
this prevailing endolysin type, we discovered a novel and highly conserved 
calcium-binding motif. This motif proved to be crucial for the stability and 
activity of the enzyme at elevated temperatures. Ultimately, we demonstrated its 
positive selection within the host's environmental conditions, particularly 
under the temperature profiles encountered in the production of yogurt, 
mozzarella, and hard cheeses that rely on S. thermophilus.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae055
PMCID: PMC10980517
PMID: 38489607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae054. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae054.

Genetic Basis and Evolutionary Forces of Sexually Dimorphic Color Variation in a 
Toad-Headed Agamid Lizard.

Lu B(1), Qiu X(1)(2), Yang W(1), Yao Z(1), Ma X(1), Deng S(1), Zhang Q(1), Fu 
J(1)(3), Qi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 610041 Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, China Jiliang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G2W1, 
Canada.

In the animal kingdom, sexually dimorphic color variation is a widespread 
phenomenon that significantly influences survival and reproductive success. 
However, the genetic underpinnings of this variation remain inadequately 
understood. Our investigation into sexually dimorphic color variation in the 
desert-dwelling Guinan population of the toad-headed agamid lizard 
(Phrynocephalus putjatai) utilized a multidisciplinary approach, encompassing 
phenotypic, ultrastructural, biochemical, genomic analyses, and behavioral 
experiments. Our findings unveil the association between distinct skin 
colorations and varying levels of carotenoid and pteridine pigments. The red 
coloration in males is determined by a genomic region on chromosome 14, housing 
four pigmentation genes: BCO2 and three 6-pyruvoyltetrahydropterin synthases. A 
Guinan population-specific nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism in BCO2 
is predicted to alter the electrostatic potential within the binding domain of 
the BCO2-β-carotene complex, influencing their interaction. Additionally, the 
gene MAP7 on chromosome 2 emerges as a potential contributor to the blue 
coloration in subadults and adult females. Sex-specific expression patterns 
point to steroid hormone-associated genes (SULT2B1 and SRD5A2) as potential 
upstream regulators influencing sexually dimorphic coloration. Visual modeling 
and field experiments support the potential selective advantages of vibrant 
coloration in desert environments. This implies that natural selection, 
potentially coupled with assortative mating, might have played a role in fixing 
color alleles, contributing to prevalence in the local desert habitat. This 
study provides novel insights into the genetic basis of carotenoid and 
pteridine-based color variation, shedding light on the evolution of sexually 
dimorphic coloration in animals. Moreover, it advances our understanding of the 
driving forces behind such intricate coloration patterns.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae054
PMCID: PMC10963123
PMID: 38466135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing interests.


47. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae053. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae053.

Predicting Functional Consequences of Recent Natural Selection in Britain.

Poyraz L(1)(2), Colbran LL(1), Mathieson I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Computational Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Oct 19;:

Ancient DNA can directly reveal the contribution of natural selection to human 
genomic variation. However, while the analysis of ancient DNA has been 
successful at identifying genomic signals of selection, inferring the phenotypic 
consequences of that selection has been more difficult. Most trait-associated 
variants are noncoding, so we expect that a large proportion of the phenotypic 
effects of selection will also act through noncoding variation. Since we cannot 
measure gene expression directly in ancient individuals, we used an approach 
(Joint-Tissue Imputation [JTI]) developed to predict gene expression from 
genotype data. We tested for changes in the predicted expression of 17,384 
protein coding genes over a time transect of 4,500 years using 91 present-day 
and 616 ancient individuals from Britain. We identified 28 genes at seven 
genomic loci with significant (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.05) changes in 
predicted expression levels in this time period. We compared the results from 
our transcriptome-wide scan to a genome-wide scan based on estimating per-single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) selection coefficients from time series data. At 
five previously identified loci, our approach allowed us to highlight small 
numbers of genes with evidence for significant shifts in expression from peaks 
that in some cases span tens of genes. At two novel loci (SLC44A5 and NUP85), we 
identify selection on gene expression not captured by scans based on genomic 
signatures of selection. Finally, we show how classical selection statistics 
(iHS and SDS) can be combined with JTI models to incorporate functional 
information into scans that use present-day data alone. These results 
demonstrate the potential of this type of information to explore both the causes 
and consequences of natural selection.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae053
PMCID: PMC10962637
PMID: 38466119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


48. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae050. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae050.

Evolution of a Restriction Factor by Domestication of a Yeast Retrotransposon.

Hannon-Hatfield JA(1), Chen J(2), Bergman CM(2)(3), Garfinkel DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, 
Athens, GA, USA.
(2)Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.

Transposable elements drive genome evolution in all branches of life. 
Transposable element insertions are often deleterious to their hosts and 
necessitate evolution of control mechanisms to limit their spread. The long 
terminal repeat retrotransposon Ty1 prime (Ty1'), a subfamily of the Ty1 family, 
is present in many Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains, but little is known about 
what controls its copy number. Here, we provide evidence that a novel gene from 
an exapted Ty1' sequence, domesticated restriction of Ty1' relic 2 (DRT2), 
encodes a restriction factor that inhibits Ty1' movement. DRT2 arose through 
domestication of a Ty1' GAG gene and contains the C-terminal domain of capsid, 
which in the related Ty1 canonical subfamily functions as a self-encoded 
restriction factor. Bioinformatic analysis reveals the widespread nature of 
DRT2, its evolutionary history, and pronounced structural variation at the Ty1' 
relic 2 locus. Ty1' retromobility analyses demonstrate DRT2 restriction factor 
functionality, and northern blot and RNA-seq analysis indicate that DRT2 is 
transcribed in multiple strains. Velocity cosedimentation profiles indicate an 
association between Drt2 and Ty1' virus-like particles or assembly complexes. 
Chimeric Ty1' elements containing DRT2 retain retromobility, suggesting an 
ancestral role of productive Gag C-terminal domain of capsid functionality is 
present in the sequence. Unlike Ty1 canonical, Ty1' retromobility increases with 
copy number, suggesting that C-terminal domain of capsid-based restriction is 
not limited to the Ty1 canonical subfamily self-encoded restriction factor and 
drove the endogenization of DRT2. The discovery of an exapted Ty1' restriction 
factor provides insight into the evolution of the Ty1 family, evolutionary 
hot-spots, and host-transposable element interactions.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae050
PMCID: PMC10951436
PMID: 38442736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae051. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae051.

The Expected Behaviors of Posterior Predictive Tests and Their Unexpected 
Interpretation.

Fabreti LG(1)(2), Coghill LM(3)(4), Thomson RC(5), Höhna S(1)(2), Brown JM(6).

Author information:
(1)GeoBio-Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Richard-Wagner-Str. 
10, Munich 80333, Germany.
(2)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Paleontology & Geobiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Richard-Wagner-Str. 10, Munich 80333, 
Germany.
(3)Center for Computation & Technology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, 
LA 70803, USA.
(4)Present address: Division of Research, Innovation, and Impact & Department of 
Veterinary Pathobiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.
(5)School of Life Sciences, University of Hawai'i at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI 96822, 
USA.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences and Museum of Natural Science, Louisiana 
State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

Poor fit between models of sequence or trait evolution and empirical data is 
known to cause biases and lead to spurious conclusions about evolutionary 
patterns and processes. Bayesian posterior prediction is a flexible and 
intuitive approach for detecting such cases of poor fit. However, the expected 
behavior of posterior predictive tests has never been characterized for 
evolutionary models, which is critical for their proper interpretation. Here, we 
show that the expected distribution of posterior predictive P-values is 
generally not uniform, in contrast to frequentist P-values used for hypothesis 
testing, and extreme posterior predictive P-values often provide more evidence 
of poor fit than typically appreciated. Posterior prediction assesses model 
adequacy under highly favorable circumstances, because the model is fitted to 
the data, which leads to expected distributions that are often concentrated 
around intermediate values. Nonuniform expected distributions of P-values do not 
pose a problem for the application of these tests, however, and posterior 
predictive P-values can be interpreted as the posterior probability that the 
fitted model would predict a dataset with a test statistic value as extreme as 
the value calculated from the observed data.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae051
PMCID: PMC10946647
PMID: 38437512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


50. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae052. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae052.

Aneuploidy Can Be an Evolutionary Diversion on the Path to Adaptation.

Kohanovski I(1)(2), Pontz M(1), Vande Zande P(3), Selmecki A(3), Dahan O(4), 
Pilpel Y(4), Yona AH(5), Ram Y(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Zoology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(2)School of Computer Science, Reichman University, Herzliya, Israel.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical 
School, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(5)Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition, Robert H. Smith 
Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel.

Aneuploidy is common in eukaryotes, often leading to decreased fitness. However, 
evidence from fungi and human tumur cells suggests that specific aneuploidies 
can be beneficial under stressful conditions and facilitate adaptation. In a 
previous evolutionary experiment with yeast, populations evolving under heat 
stress became aneuploid, only to later revert to euploidy after beneficial 
mutations accumulated. It was therefore suggested that aneuploidy is a "stepping 
stone" on the path to adaptation. Here, we test this hypothesis. We use Bayesian 
inference to fit an evolutionary model with both aneuploidy and mutation to the 
experimental results. We then predict the genotype frequency dynamics during the 
experiment, demonstrating that most of the evolved euploid population likely did 
not descend from aneuploid cells, but rather from the euploid wild-type 
population. Our model shows how the beneficial mutation supply-the product of 
population size and beneficial mutation rate-determines the evolutionary 
dynamics: with low supply, much of the evolved population descends from 
aneuploid cells; but with high supply, beneficial mutations are generated fast 
enough to outcompete aneuploidy due to its inherent fitness cost. Our results 
suggest that despite its potential fitness benefits under stress, aneuploidy can 
be an evolutionary "diversion" rather than a "stepping stone": it can delay, 
rather than facilitate, the adaptation of the population, and cells that become 
aneuploid may leave less descendants compared to cells that remain diploid.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae052
PMCID: PMC10951435
PMID: 38427813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae040. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae040.

PAPipe: A Pipeline for Comprehensive Population Genetic Analysis.

Park N(1), Kim H(1), Oh J(1), Kim J(1), Heo C(1), Kim J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul 
05029, Republic of Korea.

Advancements in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have led to a 
substantial increase in the availability of population genetic variant data, 
thus prompting the development of various population analysis tools to enhance 
our understanding of population structure and evolution. The tools that are 
currently used to analyze population genetic variant data generally require 
different environments, parameters, and formats of the input data, which can act 
as a barrier preventing the wide-spread usage of such tools by general 
researchers who may not be familiar with bioinformatics. To address this 
problem, we have developed an automated and comprehensive pipeline called PAPipe 
to perform nine widely used population genetic analyses using population NGS 
data. PAPipe seamlessly interconnects and serializes multiple steps, such as 
read trimming and mapping, genetic variant calling, data filtering, and format 
converting, along with nine population genetic analyses such as principal 
component analysis, phylogenetic analysis, population tree analysis, population 
structure analysis, linkage disequilibrium decay analysis, selective sweep 
analysis, population admixture analysis, sequentially Markovian coalescent 
analysis, and fixation index analysis. PAPipe also provides an easy-to-use web 
interface that allows for the parameters to be set and the analysis results to 
be browsed in intuitive manner. PAPipe can be used to generate extensive results 
that provide insights that can help enhance user convenience and data usability. 
PAPipe is freely available at https://github.com/jkimlab/PAPipe.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae040
PMCID: PMC10919927
PMID: 38427787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae047. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae047.

Formation of Different Polyploids Through Disrupting Meiotic Crossover 
Frequencies Based on cntd1 Knockout in Zebrafish.

Ou Y(1)(2), Li H(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Dai X(3), He J(4), Wang S(1)(2), Liu 
Q(1)(2), Yang C(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Zhao R(1)(2), Yin Z(5), Shu Y(1)(2), Liu 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology of Freshwater Fish, College of 
Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, China.
(3)Integrative Science Center of Germplasm Creation in Western China (CHONGQING) 
Science City, Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development 
(Ministry of Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School 
of Life Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China.
(4)Institute of Reproductive and Stem Cell Engineering, NHC Key Laboratory of 
Human Stem Cell and Reproductive Engineering, School of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Central South University, Changsha 410078, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of 
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China.

Polyploidy, a significant catalyst for speciation and evolutionary processes in 
both plant and animal kingdoms, has been recognized for a long time. However, 
the exact molecular mechanism that leads to polyploid formation, especially in 
vertebrates, is not fully understood. Our study aimed to elucidate this 
phenomenon using the zebrafish model. We successfully achieved an effective 
knockout of the cyclin N-terminal domain containing 1 (cntd1) using CRISPR/Cas9 
technology. This resulted in impaired formation of meiotic crossovers, leading 
to cell-cycle arrest during meiotic metaphase and triggering apoptosis of 
spermatocytes in the testes. Despite these defects, the mutant (cntd1-/-) males 
were still able to produce a limited amount of sperm with normal ploidy and 
function. Interestingly, in the mutant females, it was the ploidy not the 
capacity of egg production that was altered. This resulted in the production of 
haploid, aneuploid, and unreduced gametes. This alteration enabled us to 
successfully obtain triploid and tetraploid zebrafish from cntd1-/- and 
cntd1-/-/- females, respectively. Furthermore, the tetraploid-heterozygous 
zebrafish produced reduced-diploid gametes and yielded all-triploid or 
all-tetraploid offspring when crossed with wild-type (WT) or tetraploid 
zebrafish, respectively. Collectively, our findings provide direct evidence 
supporting the crucial role of meiotic crossover defects in the process of 
polyploidization. This is particularly evident in the generation of unreduced 
eggs in fish and, potentially, other vertebrate species.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae047
PMCID: PMC10939445
PMID: 38421617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae048. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae048.

Fitness Effects of Phenotypic Mutations at Proteome-Scale Reveal Optimality of 
Translation Machinery.

Landerer C(1)(2), Poehls J(1)(2), Toth-Petroczy A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden, 
Germany.
(2)Center for Systems Biology Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(3)Cluster of Excellence Physics of Life, TU Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany.

Errors in protein translation can lead to non-genetic, phenotypic mutations, 
including amino acid misincorporations. While phenotypic mutations can increase 
protein diversity, the systematic characterization of their proteome-wide 
frequencies and their evolutionary impact has been lacking. Here, we developed a 
mechanistic model of translation errors to investigate how selection acts on 
protein populations produced by amino acid misincorporations. We fitted the 
model to empirical observations of misincorporations obtained from over a 
hundred mass spectrometry datasets of E. coli and S. cerevisiae. We found that 
on average 20% to 23% of proteins synthesized in the cell are expected to harbor 
at least one amino acid misincorporation, and that deleterious misincorporations 
are less likely to occur. Combining misincorporation probabilities and the 
estimated fitness effects of amino acid substitutions in a population genetics 
framework, we found 74% of mistranslation events in E. coli and 94% in S. 
cerevisiae to be neutral. We further show that the set of available synonymous 
tRNAs is subject to evolutionary pressure, as the presence of missing tRNAs 
would increase codon-anticodon cross-reactivity and misincorporation error 
rates. Overall, we find that the translation machinery is likely optimal in E. 
coli and S. cerevisiae and that both local solutions at the level of codons and 
a global solution such as the tRNA pool can mitigate the impact of translation 
errors. We provide a framework to study the evolutionary impact of 
codon-specific translation errors and a method for their proteome-wide detection 
across organisms and conditions.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae048
PMCID: PMC10939442
PMID: 38421032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.


54. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae046. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae046.

Genetic Basis and Evolution of Structural Color Polymorphism in an Australian 
Songbird.

Sin SYW(1)(2), Ke F(1), Chen G(1), Huang PY(1), Enbody ED(3), Karubian J(3), 
Webster MS(4), Edwards SV(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Tulane University, New 
Orleans, LA 70118, USA.
(4)Cornell Lab of Ornithology and Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, 
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Island organisms often evolve phenotypes divergent from their mainland 
counterparts, providing a useful system for studying adaptation under 
differential selection. In the white-winged fairywren (Malurus leucopterus), 
subspecies on two islands have a black nuptial plumage whereas the subspecies on 
the Australian mainland has a blue nuptial plumage. The black subspecies have a 
feather nanostructure that could in principle produce a blue structural color, 
suggesting a blue ancestor. An earlier study proposed independent evolution of 
melanism on the islands based on the history of subspecies divergence. However, 
the genetic basis of melanism and the origin of color differentiation in this 
group are still unknown. Here, we used whole-genome resequencing to investigate 
the genetic basis of melanism by comparing the blue and black M. leucopterus 
subspecies to identify highly divergent genomic regions. We identified a 
well-known pigmentation gene ASIP and four candidate genes that may contribute 
to feather nanostructure development. Contrary to the prediction of convergent 
evolution of island melanism, we detected signatures of a selective sweep in 
genomic regions containing ASIP and SCUBE2 not in the black subspecies but in 
the blue subspecies, which possesses many derived SNPs in these regions, 
suggesting that the mainland subspecies has re-evolved a blue plumage from a 
black ancestor. This proposed re-evolution was likely driven by a preexisting 
female preference. Our findings provide new insight into the evolution of 
plumage coloration in island versus continental populations, and, importantly, 
we identify candidate genes that likely play roles in the development and 
evolution of feather structural coloration.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae046
PMCID: PMC10962638
PMID: 38415852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


55. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Apr 2;41(4):msae045. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae045.

Functional and Evolutionary Integration of a Fungal Gene With a Bacterial 
Operon.

Sun L(1)(2), David KT(3), Wolters JF(1)(2), Karlen SD(1), Gonçalves C(2)(3)(4), 
Opulente DA(1)(2)(5), LaBella AL(3)(6), Groenewald M(7), Zhou X(3)(8), Shen 
XX(3)(9), Rokas A(3), Hittinger CT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)DOE Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI 53726, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Genetics, Center for Genomic Science Innovation, Wisconsin 
Energy Institute, J. F. Crow Institute for the Study of Evolution, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53726, USA.
(3)Evolutionary Studies Initiative and Department of Biological Sciences, 
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235, USA.
(4)UCIBIO, Department of Life Sciences, NOVA School of Science and Technology, 
Universidade NOVA de Lisboa, Caparica, Portugal.
(5)Biology Department, Villanova University, Villanova, PA 19085, USA.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, University of North Carolina at 
Charlotte, Charlotte, NC 28223, USA.
(7)Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Microbial Signals and Disease Control, 
Integrative Microbiology Research Center, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou 510642, China.
(9)College of Agriculture and Biotechnology and Centre for Evolutionary & 
Organismal Biology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Nov 21;:

Siderophores are crucial for iron-scavenging in microorganisms. While many 
yeasts can uptake siderophores produced by other organisms, they are typically 
unable to synthesize siderophores themselves. In contrast, 
Wickerhamiella/Starmerella (W/S) clade yeasts gained the capacity to make the 
siderophore enterobactin following the remarkable horizontal acquisition of a 
bacterial operon enabling enterobactin synthesis. Yet, how these yeasts absorb 
the iron bound by enterobactin remains unresolved. Here, we demonstrate that 
Enb1 is the key enterobactin importer in the W/S-clade species Starmerella 
bombicola. Through phylogenomic analyses, we show that ENB1 is present in all 
W/S clade yeast species that retained the enterobactin biosynthetic genes. 
Conversely, it is absent in species that lost the ent genes, except for 
Starmerella stellata, making this species the only cheater in the W/S clade that 
can utilize enterobactin without producing it. Through phylogenetic analyses, we 
infer that ENB1 is a fungal gene that likely existed in the W/S clade prior to 
the acquisition of the ent genes and subsequently experienced multiple gene 
losses and duplications. Through phylogenetic topology tests, we show that ENB1 
likely underwent horizontal gene transfer from an ancient W/S clade yeast to the 
order Saccharomycetales, which includes the model yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, followed by extensive secondary losses. Taken together, these 
results suggest that the fungal ENB1 and bacterial ent genes were cooperatively 
integrated into a functional unit within the W/S clade that enabled adaptation 
to iron-limited environments. This integrated fungal-bacterial circuit and its 
dynamic evolution determine the extant distribution of yeast enterobactin 
producers and cheaters.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae045
PMCID: PMC11043216
PMID: 38415839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest A.R. is a scientific 
consultant for LifeMine Therapeutics, Inc.


56. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae042. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae042.

PlantFUNCO: Integrative Functional Genomics Database Reveals Clues into 
Duplicates Divergence Evolution.

Roces V(1), Guerrero S(1), Álvarez A(1), Pascual J(1), Meijón M(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant Physiology, Department of Organisms and Systems Biology, Faculty of 
Biology and Biotechnology Institute of Asturias, University of Oviedo, Asturias, 
Spain.

Evolutionary epigenomics and, more generally, evolutionary functional genomics, 
are emerging fields that study how non-DNA-encoded alterations in gene 
expression regulation are an important form of plasticity and adaptation. 
Previous evidence analyzing plants' comparative functional genomics has mostly 
focused on comparing same assay-matched experiments, missing the power of 
heterogeneous datasets for conservation inference. To fill this gap, we 
developed PlantFUN(ctional)CO(nservation) database, which is constituted by 
several tools and two main resources: interspecies chromatin states and 
functional genomics conservation scores, presented and analyzed in this work for 
three well-established plant models (Arabidopsis thaliana, Oryza sativa, and Zea 
mays). Overall, PlantFUNCO elucidated evolutionary information in terms of 
cross-species functional agreement. Therefore, providing a new complementary 
comparative-genomics source for assessing evolutionary studies. To illustrate 
the potential applications of this database, we replicated two previously 
published models predicting genetic redundancy in A. thaliana and found that 
chromatin states are a determinant of paralogs degree of functional divergence. 
These predictions were validated based on the phenotypes of mitochondrial 
alternative oxidase knockout mutants under two different stressors. Taking all 
the above into account, PlantFUNCO aim to leverage data diversity and 
extrapolate molecular mechanisms findings from different model organisms to 
determine the extent of functional conservation, thus, deepening our 
understanding of how plants epigenome and functional noncoding genome have 
evolved. PlantFUNCO is available at https://rocesv.github.io/PlantFUNCO.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae042
PMCID: PMC10917205
PMID: 38411627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae021. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae021.

Gene and Allele-Specific Expression Underlying the Electric Signal Divergence in 
African Weakly Electric Fish.

Cheng F(1), Dennis AB(1)(2), Baumann O(3), Kirschbaum F(1)(4), 
Abdelilah-Seyfried S(3), Tiedemann R(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Evolutionary Biology/Systematic Zoology, Institute of Biochemistry 
and Biology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Adaptive Evolution and Genomics, Research Unit of Environmental 
and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Life, Earth & Environment, University of 
Namur, Namur, Belgium.
(3)Department of Animal Physiology, Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, 
University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
(4)Department of Crop and Animal Science, Faculty of Life Sciences, Humboldt 
University, Berlin, Germany.

In the African weakly electric fish genus Campylomormyrus, electric organ 
discharge signals are strikingly different in shape and duration among closely 
related species, contribute to prezygotic isolation, and may have triggered an 
adaptive radiation. We performed mRNA sequencing on electric organs and skeletal 
muscles (from which the electric organs derive) from 3 species with short 
(0.4 ms), medium (5 ms), and long (40 ms) electric organ discharges and 2 
different cross-species hybrids. We identified 1,444 upregulated genes in 
electric organ shared by all 5 species/hybrid cohorts, rendering them candidate 
genes for electric organ-specific properties in Campylomormyrus. We further 
identified several candidate genes, including KCNJ2 and KLF5, and their 
upregulation may contribute to increased electric organ discharge duration. 
Hybrids between a short (Campylomormyrus compressirostris) and a long 
(Campylomormyrus rhynchophorus) discharging species exhibit electric organ 
discharges of intermediate duration and showed imbalanced expression of KCNJ2 
alleles, pointing toward a cis-regulatory difference at this locus, relative to 
electric organ discharge duration. KLF5 is a transcription factor potentially 
balancing potassium channel gene expression, a crucial process for the formation 
of an electric organ discharge. Unraveling the genetic basis of the 
species-specific modulation of the electric organ discharge in Campylomormyrus 
is crucial for understanding the adaptive radiation of this emerging model taxon 
of ecological (perhaps even sympatric) speciation.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae021
PMCID: PMC10897887
PMID: 38410843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


58. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae044. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae044.

Rapid and Repeated Climate Adaptation Involving Chromosome Inversions following 
Invasion of an Insect.

Ma LJ(1), Cao LJ(1), Chen JC(1), Tang MQ(1)(2), Song W(1), Yang FY(1), Shen 
XJ(1), Ren YJ(1)(2), Yang Q(3), Li H(2), Hoffmann AA(3), Wei SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Protection, Beijing Academy of Agriculture and Forestry 
Sciences, Beijing 100097, China.
(2)Department of Entomology and MOA Key Lab of Pest Monitoring and Green 
Management, College of Plant Protection, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100193, China.
(3)Bio21 Institute, School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria 3010, Australia.

Following invasion, insects can become adapted to conditions experienced in 
their invasive range, but there are few studies on the speed of adaptation and 
its genomic basis. Here, we examine a small insect pest, Thrips palmi, following 
its contemporary range expansion across a sharp climate gradient from the 
subtropics to temperate areas. We first found a geographically associated 
population genetic structure and inferred a stepping-stone dispersal pattern in 
this pest from the open fields of southern China to greenhouse environments of 
northern regions, with limited gene flow after colonization. In common garden 
experiments, both the field and greenhouse groups exhibited clinal patterns in 
thermal tolerance as measured by critical thermal maximum (CTmax) closely linked 
with latitude and temperature variables. A selection experiment reinforced the 
evolutionary potential of CTmax with an estimated h2 of 6.8% for the trait. We 
identified 3 inversions in the genome that were closely associated with CTmax, 
accounting for 49.9%, 19.6%, and 8.6% of the variance in CTmax among 
populations. Other genomic variations in CTmax outside the inversion region were 
specific to certain populations but functionally conserved. These findings 
highlight rapid adaptation to CTmax in both open field and greenhouse 
populations and reiterate the importance of inversions behaving as large-effect 
alleles in climate adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae044
PMCID: PMC10924284
PMID: 38401527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.


59. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae041. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae041.

Transposable Element Insertions Are Associated with Batesian Mimicry in the 
Pantropical Butterfly Hypolimnas misippus.

Orteu A(1)(2), Kucka M(3), Gordon IJ(4), Ng'iru I(5)(6)(7), van der Heijden 
ESM(1)(2), Talavera G(8), Warren IA(1), Collins S(9), Ffrench-Constant RH(10), 
Martins DJ(11), Chan YF(3), Jiggins CD(1), Martin SH(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK.
(2)Tree of Life Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK.
(3)Friedrich Miescher Laboratory of the Max Planck Society, Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Centre of Excellence in Biodiversity, University of Rwanda, Huye, Rwanda.
(5)Mpala Research Centre, Nanyuki 10400, Laikipia, Kenya.
(6)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF 10 3AX, UK.
(7)UK Centre for Ecology and Hydrology, Wallingford OX10 8BB, UK.
(8)Institut Botànic de Barcelona (IBB), CSIC-CMCNB, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(9)African Butterfly Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya.
(10)Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter in Cornwall, 
Penryn TR10 9FE, UK.
(11)Turkana Basin Institute, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA.
(12)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Hypolimnas misippus is a Batesian mimic of the toxic African Queen butterfly 
(Danaus chrysippus). Female H. misippus butterflies use two major wing 
patterning loci (M and A) to imitate three color morphs of D. chrysippus found 
in different regions of Africa. In this study, we examine the evolution of the M 
locus and identify it as an example of adaptive atavism. This phenomenon 
involves a morphological reversion to an ancestral character that results in an 
adaptive phenotype. We show that H. misippus has re-evolved an ancestral wing 
pattern present in other Hypolimnas species, repurposing it for Batesian mimicry 
of a D. chrysippus morph. Using haplotagging, a linked-read sequencing 
technology, and our new analytical tool, Wrath, we discover two large 
transposable element insertions located at the M locus and establish that these 
insertions are present in the dominant allele responsible for producing mimetic 
phenotype. By conducting a comparative analysis involving additional Hypolimnas 
species, we demonstrate that the dominant allele is derived. This suggests that, 
in the derived allele, the transposable elements disrupt a cis-regulatory 
element, leading to the reversion to an ancestral phenotype that is then 
utilized for Batesian mimicry of a distinct model, a different morph of D. 
chrysippus. Our findings present a compelling instance of convergent evolution 
and adaptive atavism, in which the same pattern element has independently 
evolved multiple times in Hypolimnas butterflies, repeatedly playing a role in 
Batesian mimicry of diverse model species.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae041
PMCID: PMC10924252
PMID: 38401262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae043. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae043.

Cytonuclear Interactions and Subgenome Dominance Shape the Evolution of 
Organelle-Targeted Genes in the Brassica Triangle of U.

Kan S(1)(2), Liao X(2), Lan L(2)(3), Kong J(2)(4), Wang J(2)(3), Nie L(2), Zou 
J(5), An H(6), Wu Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Marine College, Shandong University, Weihai 264209, China.
(2)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Key 
Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Affairs, Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen 518120, China.
(3)College of Science, Health, Engineering and Education, Murdoch University, 
Murdoch, 6150 Western Australia, Australia.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Adaptation and Improvement, School of 
Life Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, China.
(5)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, College of Plant Science 
and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
(6)Bioinformatics and Analytics Core, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.

The interaction and coevolution between nuclear and cytoplasmic genomes are one 
of the fundamental hallmarks of eukaryotic genome evolution and, 2 billion yr 
later, are still major contributors to the formation of new species. Although 
many studies have investigated the role of cytonuclear interactions following 
allopolyploidization, the relative magnitude of the effect of subgenome 
dominance versus cytonuclear interaction on genome evolution remains unclear. 
The Brassica triangle of U features 3 diploid species that together have formed 
3 separate allotetraploid species on similar evolutionary timescales, providing 
an ideal system for understanding the contribution of the cytoplasmic donor to 
hybrid polyploid. Here, we investigated the evolutionary pattern of 
organelle-targeted genes in Brassica carinata (BBCC) and 2 varieties of Brassica 
juncea (AABB) at the whole-genome level, with particular focus on cytonuclear 
enzyme complexes. We found partial evidence that plastid-targeted genes 
experience selection to match plastid genomes, but no obvious corresponding 
signal in mitochondria-targeted genes from these 2 separately formed 
allopolyploids. Interestingly, selection acting on plastid genomes always 
reduced the retention rate of plastid-targeted genes encoded by the B subgenome, 
regardless of whether the Brassica nigra (BB) subgenome was contributed by the 
paternal or maternal progenitor. More broadly, this study illustrates the 
distinct selective pressures experienced by plastid- and mitochondria-targeted 
genes, despite a shared pattern of inheritance and natural history. Our study 
also highlights an important role for subgenome dominance in allopolyploid 
genome evolution, even in genes whose function depends on separately inherited 
molecules.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae043
PMCID: PMC10919925
PMID: 38391484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae038. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae038.

Genomic Analyses Capture the Human-Induced Demographic Collapse and Recovery in 
a Wide-Ranging Cervid.

Kessler C(1), Shafer ABA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Environmental and Life Sciences Graduate Program, Trent University, 
Peterborough, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Forensic Science, Trent University, Peterborough, Ontario, 
Canada.

The glacial cycles of the Quaternary heavily impacted species through 
successions of population contractions and expansions. Similarly, populations 
have been intensely shaped by human pressures such as unregulated hunting and 
land use changes. White-tailed and mule deer survived in different refugia 
through the Last Glacial Maximum, and their populations were severely reduced 
after the European colonization. Here, we analyzed 73 resequenced deer genomes 
from across their North American range to understand the consequences of 
climatic and anthropogenic pressures on deer demographic and adaptive history. 
We found strong signals of climate-induced vicariance and demographic decline; 
notably, multiple sequentially Markovian coalescent recovers a severe decline in 
mainland white-tailed deer effective population size (Ne) at the end of the Last 
Glacial Maximum. We found robust evidence for colonial overharvest in the form 
of a recent and dramatic drop in Ne in all analyzed populations. Historical 
census size and restocking data show a clear parallel to historical Ne 
estimates, and temporal Ne/Nc ratio shows patterns of conservation concern for 
mule deer. Signatures of selection highlight genes related to temperature, 
including a cold receptor previously highlighted in woolly mammoth. We also 
detected immune genes that we surmise reflect the changing land use patterns in 
North America. Our study provides a detailed picture of anthropogenic and 
climatic-induced decline in deer diversity and clues to understanding the 
conservation concerns of mule deer and the successful demographic recovery of 
white-tailed deer.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae038
PMCID: PMC10917209
PMID: 38378172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae032. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae032.

Investigating the Evolution of Drosophila STING-Dependent Antiviral Innate 
Immunity by Multispecies Comparison of 2'3'-cGAMP Responses.

Hédelin L(1), Thiébaut A(2), Huang J(3), Li X(3), Lemoine A(1), Haas G(1), 
Meignin C(1), Cai H(3), Waterhouse RM(2), Martins N(1), Imler JL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)CNRS UPR9022, Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université de 
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)School of Basic Medical Science, Sino-French Hoffmann Institute, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Viruses represent a major threat to all animals, which defend themselves through 
induction of a large set of virus-stimulated genes that collectively control the 
infection. In vertebrates, these genes include interferons that play a critical 
role in the amplification of the response to infection. Virus- and 
interferon-stimulated genes include restriction factors targeting the different 
steps of the viral replication cycle, in addition to molecules associated with 
inflammation and adaptive immunity. Predictably, antiviral genes evolve 
dynamically in response to viral pressure. As a result, each animal has a unique 
arsenal of antiviral genes. Here, we exploit the capacity to experimentally 
activate the evolutionarily conserved stimulator of IFN genes (STING) signaling 
pathway by injection of the cyclic dinucleotide 2'3'-cyclic guanosine 
monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate into flies to define the repertoire of 
STING-regulated genes in 10 Drosophila species, spanning 40 million years of 
evolution. Our data reveal a set of conserved STING-regulated factors, including 
STING itself, a cGAS-like-receptor, the restriction factor pastel, and the 
antiviral protein Vago, but also 2 key components of the antiviral RNA 
interference pathway, Dicer-2, and Argonaute2. In addition, we identify unknown 
species- or lineage-specific genes that have not been previously associated with 
resistance to viruses. Our data provide insight into the core antiviral response 
in Drosophila flies and pave the way for the characterization of previously 
unknown antiviral effectors.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae032
PMCID: PMC10917227
PMID: 38377349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae034. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae034.

Adaptive Selection of Cis-regulatory Elements in the Han Chinese.

Liu S(1)(2), Luo H(1), Zhang P(1), Li Y(1), Hao D(1), Zhang S(1)(2), Song T(1), 
Xu T(3)(4), He S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Epigenetic Regulation and Intervention, Institute of 
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100049, China.
(3)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China.
(4)Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Jinan 250117, Shandong, China.

Cis-regulatory elements have an important role in human adaptation to the living 
environment. However, the lag in population genomic cohort studies and 
epigenomic studies, hinders the research in the adaptive analysis of 
cis-regulatory elements in human populations. In this study, we collected 4,013 
unrelated individuals and performed a comprehensive analysis of adaptive 
selection of genome-wide cis-regulatory elements in the Han Chinese. In total, 
12.34% of genomic regions are under the influence of adaptive selection, where 
1.00% of enhancers and 2.06% of promoters are under positive selection, and 
0.06% of enhancers and 0.02% of promoters are under balancing selection. Gene 
ontology enrichment analysis of these cis-regulatory elements under adaptive 
selection reveals that many positive selections in the Han Chinese occur in 
pathways involved in cell-cell adhesion processes, and many balancing selections 
are related to immune processes. Two classes of adaptive cis-regulatory elements 
related to cell adhesion were in-depth analyzed, one is the adaptive enhancers 
derived from neanderthal introgression, leads to lower hyaluronidase level in 
skin, and brings better performance on UV-radiation resistance to the Han 
Chinese. Another one is the cis-regulatory elements regulating wound healing, 
and the results suggest the positive selection inhibits coagulation and promotes 
angiogenesis and wound healing in the Han Chinese. Finally, we found that many 
pathogenic alleles, such as risky alleles of type 2 diabetes or schizophrenia, 
remain in the population due to the hitchhiking effect of positive selections. 
Our findings will help deepen our understanding of the adaptive evolution of 
genome regulation in the Han Chinese.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae034
PMCID: PMC10917166
PMID: 38377343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


64. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae037. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae037.

Degeneration of the Olfactory System in a Murid Rodent that Evolved Diurnalism.

Liao BY(1), Weng MP(1), Chang TY(1), Chang AY(1), Ching YH(2), Wu CH(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, 
Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Tzu Chi University, 
Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Laboratory Animal Center, National Health Research Institutes, Taiwan, 
Republic of China.

In mammalian research, it has been debated what can initiate an evolutionary 
tradeoff between different senses, and the phenomenon of sensory tradeoff in 
rodents, the most abundant mammalian clade, is not evident. The Nile rat 
(Arvicanthis niloticus), a murid rodent, recently adapted to a diurnal niche 
through an evolutionary acquisition of daylight vision with enhanced visual 
acuity. As such, this model provides an opportunity for a cross-species 
investigation where comparative morphological and multi-omic analyses of the 
Nile rat are made with its closely related nocturnal species, e.g. the mouse 
(Mus musculus) and the rat (Rattus norvegicus). Thus, morphological examinations 
were performed, and evolutionary reductions in relative sizes of turbinal bone 
surfaces, the cribriform plate, and the olfactory bulb were discovered in Nile 
rats. Subsequently, we compared multiple murid genomes, and profiled olfactory 
epithelium transcriptomes of mice and Nile rats at various ages with RNA 
sequencing. The results further demonstrate that, in comparison with mouse 
olfactory receptor (OR) genes, Nile rat OR genes have experienced less frequent 
gain, more frequent loss, and more frequent expression reduction during their 
evolution. Furthermore, functional degeneration of coding sequences in the Nile 
rat lineage was found in OR genes, yet not in other genes. Taken together, these 
results suggest that acquisition of improved vision in the Nile rat has been 
accompanied by degeneration of both olfaction-related anatomical structures and 
OR gene repertoires, consistent with the hypothesis of an olfaction-vision 
tradeoff initiated by the switch from a nocturnal to a diurnal lifestyle in 
mammals.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae037
PMCID: PMC10906987
PMID: 38376543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
competing interest.


65. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae036. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae036.

A High-Quality Blue Whale Genome, Segmental Duplications, and Historical 
Demography.

Bukhman YV(1), Morin PA(2), Meyer S(3), Chu LF(1)(4), Jacobsen JK(5), 
Antosiewicz-Bourget J(1), Mamott D(1), Gonzales M(3), Argus C(1), Bolin J(1), 
Berres ME(6), Fedrigo O(7), Steill J(1), Swanson SA(1), Jiang P(8)(9)(10), Rhie 
A(11), Formenti G(12), Phillippy AM(11), Harris RS(13), Wood JMD(14), Howe 
K(14), Kirilenko BM(15)(16)(17), Munegowda C(15)(16)(17), Hiller M(15)(16)(17), 
Jain A(18), Kihara D(18)(19), Johnston JS(20), Ionkov A(1), Raja K(1), Toh H(3), 
Lang A(2), Wolf M(21)(22), Jarvis ED(7)(12), Thomson JA(1)(23)(24), Chaisson 
MJP(25), Stewart R(1).

Author information:
(1)Regenerative Biology, Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI 53715, 
USA.
(2)Southwest Fisheries Science Center, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA), La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Comparative Biology and Experimental Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
(5)V.E. Enterprises, Arcata, CA, USA.
(6)University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center, Bioinformatics Resource Center, 
University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(7)Vertebrate Genome Lab, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(8)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease (GRHD), Cleveland State 
University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(9)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, Cleveland 
State University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(10)Center for RNA Science and Therapeutics, School of Medicine, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(11)Genome Informatics Section, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(12)Laboratory of Neurogenetics of Language, The Rockefeller University/HHMI, 
New York, NY 10065, USA.
(13)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 
16802, USA.
(14)Tree of Life, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.
(15)LOEWE Centre for Translational Biodiversity Genomics, 60325 Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(16)Senckenberg Research Institute, 60325 Frankfurt, Germany.
(17)Institute of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Faculty of Biosciences, Goethe 
University Frankfurt, 60438 Frankfurt, Germany.
(18)Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, 
USA.
(19)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 
47907, USA.
(20)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, 
USA.
(21)Institute for Evolution and Biodiversity (IEB), University of Muenster, 
48149, Muenster, Germany.
(22)Senckenberg Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BiK-F), Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany.
(23)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.
(24)Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin School 
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53726, USA.
(25)Department of Quantitative and Computational Biology, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

The blue whale, Balaenoptera musculus, is the largest animal known to have ever 
existed, making it an important case study in longevity and resistance to 
cancer. To further this and other blue whale-related research, we report a 
reference-quality, long-read-based genome assembly of this fascinating species. 
We assembled the genome from PacBio long reads and utilized Illumina/10×, 
optical maps, and Hi-C data for scaffolding, polishing, and manual curation. We 
also provided long read RNA-seq data to facilitate the annotation of the 
assembly by NCBI and Ensembl. Additionally, we annotated both haplotypes using 
TOGA and measured the genome size by flow cytometry. We then compared the blue 
whale genome with other cetaceans and artiodactyls, including vaquita (Phocoena 
sinus), the world's smallest cetacean, to investigate blue whale's unique 
biological traits. We found a dramatic amplification of several genes in the 
blue whale genome resulting from a recent burst in segmental duplications, 
though the possible connection between this amplification and giant body size 
requires further study. We also discovered sites in the insulin-like growth 
factor-1 gene correlated with body size in cetaceans. Finally, using our 
assembly to examine the heterozygosity and historical demography of Pacific and 
Atlantic blue whale populations, we found that the genomes of both populations 
are highly heterozygous and that their genetic isolation dates to the last 
interglacial period. Taken together, these results indicate how a high-quality, 
annotated blue whale genome will serve as an important resource for biology, 
evolution, and conservation research.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae036
PMCID: PMC10919930
PMID: 38376487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


66. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae035. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae035.

The Effects of De Novo Mutation on Gene Expression and the Consequences for 
Fitness in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.

Balogun EJ(1)(2), Ness RW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, William G. Davis Building, University of Toronto, 
Mississauga L5L-1C6, Canada.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto M5S-3B2, Canada.

Mutation is the ultimate source of genetic variation, the bedrock of evolution. 
Yet, predicting the consequences of new mutations remains a challenge in 
biology. Gene expression provides a potential link between a genotype and its 
phenotype. But the variation in gene expression created by de novo mutation and 
the fitness consequences of mutational changes to expression remain relatively 
unexplored. Here, we investigate the effects of >2,600 de novo mutations on gene 
expression across the transcriptome of 28 mutation accumulation lines derived 
from 2 independent wild-type genotypes of the green algae Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii. We observed that the amount of genetic variance in gene expression 
created by mutation (Vm) was similar to the variance that mutation generates in 
typical polygenic phenotypic traits and approximately 15-fold the variance seen 
in the limited species where Vm in gene expression has been estimated. Despite 
the clear effect of mutation on expression, we did not observe a simple additive 
effect of mutation on expression change, with no linear correlation between the 
total expression change and mutation count of individual MA lines. We therefore 
inferred the distribution of expression effects of new mutations to connect the 
number of mutations to the number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Our 
inferred DEE is highly L-shaped with 95% of mutations causing 0-1 DEG while the 
remaining 5% are spread over a long tail of large effect mutations that cause 
multiple genes to change expression. The distribution is consistent with many 
cis-acting mutation targets that affect the expression of only 1 gene and a 
large target of trans-acting targets that have the potential to affect tens or 
hundreds of genes. Further evidence for cis-acting mutations can be seen in the 
overabundance of mutations in or near differentially expressed genes. Supporting 
evidence for trans-acting mutations comes from a 15:1 ratio of DEGs to mutations 
and the clusters of DEGs in the co-expression network, indicative of shared 
regulatory architecture. Lastly, we show that there is a negative correlation 
with the extent of expression divergence from the ancestor and fitness, 
providing direct evidence of the deleterious effects of perturbing gene 
expression.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae035
PMCID: PMC10910851
PMID: 38366781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae033. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae033.

Brief Communication: The Predictable Network Topology of Evolutionary Genomic 
Constraint.

Wollenberg Valero KC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biology and Environmental Science, University College Dublin, 
Belfield, Ireland.

Large-scale comparative genomics studies offer valuable resources for 
understanding both functional and evolutionary rate constraints. It is suggested 
that constraint aligns with the topology of genomic networks, increasing toward 
the center, with intermediate nodes combining relaxed constraint with higher 
contributions to the phenotype due to pleiotropy. However, this pattern has yet 
to be demonstrated in vertebrates. This study shows that constraint intensifies 
toward the network's center in placental mammals. Genes with rate changes 
associated with emergence of hibernation cluster mostly toward intermediate 
positions, with higher constraint in faster-evolving genes, which is indicative 
of a "sweet spot" for adaptation. If this trend holds universally, network node 
metrics could predict high-constraint regions even in clades lacking empirical 
constraint data.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae033
PMCID: PMC10906983
PMID: 38366776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae030. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae030.

A Critical Appraisal of DNA Transfer from Plants to Parasitic Cyst Nematodes.

Ko I(1)(2), Kranse OP(1), Senatori B(1), Eves-van den Akker S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, The Crop Science Centre, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EA, UK.
(2)Present address: Department of Plant Pathology, Washington State University, 
Pullman 99163, USA.

Plant-parasitic nematodes are one of the most economically important pests of 
crops. It is widely accepted that horizontal gene transfer-the natural 
acquisition of foreign genes in parasitic nematodes-contributes to parasitism. 
However, an apparent paradox has emerged from horizontal gene transfer analyses: 
On the one hand, distantly related organisms with very dissimilar genetic 
structures (i.e. bacteria), and only transient interactions with nematodes as 
far as we know, dominate the list of putative donors, while on the other hand, 
considerably more closely related organisms (i.e. the host plant), with similar 
genetic structure (i.e. introns) and documented long-term associations with 
nematodes, are rare among the list of putative donors. Given that these 
nematodes ingest cytoplasm from a living plant cell for several weeks, there 
seems to be a conspicuous absence of plant-derived cases. Here, we used 
comparative genomic approaches to evaluate possible plant-derived horizontal 
gene transfer events in plant parasitic nematodes. Our evidence supports a 
cautionary message for plant-derived horizontal gene transfer cases in the sugar 
beet cyst nematode, Heterodera schachtii. We propose a 4-step model for 
horizontal gene transfer from plant to parasite in order to evaluate why the 
absence of plant-derived horizontal gene transfer cases is observed. We find 
that the plant genome is mobilized by the nematode during infection, but that 
uptake of the said "mobilome" is the first major barrier to horizontal gene 
transfer from host to nematode. These results provide new insight into our 
understanding of the prevalence/role of nucleic acid exchange in the arms race 
between plants and plant parasites.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae030
PMCID: PMC10899095
PMID: 38366574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae031. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae031.

Secondary Contact, Introgressive Hybridization, and Genome Stabilization in 
Sticklebacks.

Feng X(1)(2), Merilä J(1)(3), Löytynoja A(2).

Author information:
(1)Organismal and Evolutionary Biology Research Programme, Faculty of Biological 
and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland.
(2)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland.
(3)Area of Ecology and Biodiversity, The School of Biological Sciences, Kadoorie 
Biological Sciences Building, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
SAR.

Advances in genomic studies have revealed that hybridization in nature is 
pervasive and raised questions about the dynamics of different genetic and 
evolutionary factors following the initial hybridization event. While recent 
research has proposed that the genomic outcomes of hybridization might be 
predictable to some extent, many uncertainties remain. With comprehensive 
whole-genome sequence data, we investigated the genetic introgression between 2 
divergent lineages of 9-spined sticklebacks (Pungitius pungitius) in the Baltic 
Sea. We found that the intensity and direction of selection on the introgressed 
variation has varied across different genomic elements: while functionally 
important regions displayed reduced rates of introgression, promoter regions 
showed enrichment. Despite the general trend of negative selection, we 
identified specific genomic regions that were enriched for introgressed 
variants, and within these regions, we detected footprints of selection, 
indicating adaptive introgression. Geographically, we found the selection 
against the functional changes to be strongest in the vicinity of the secondary 
contact zone and weaken as a function of distance from the initial contact. 
Altogether, the results suggest that the stabilization of introgressed variation 
in the genomes is a complex, multistage process involving both negative and 
positive selection. In spite of the predominance of negative selection against 
introgressed variants, we also found evidence for adaptive introgression 
variants likely associated with adaptation to Baltic Sea environmental 
conditions.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae031
PMCID: PMC10903534
PMID: 38366566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae022. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae022.

Adaptive Evolution of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in Human Airways Shows Phenotypic 
Convergence Despite Diverse Patterns of Genomic Changes.

Espaillat A(1), Colque CA(1), Rago D(2), La Rosa R(1)(2), Molin S(2), Johansen 
HK(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology 9301, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen Ø 2100, 
Denmark.
(2)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Lyngby 2800, Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen N 2200, Denmark.

Selective forces in the environment drive bacterial adaptation to novel niches, 
choosing the fitter variants in the population. However, in dynamic and changing 
environments, the evolutionary processes controlling bacterial adaptation are 
difficult to monitor. Here, we follow 9 people with cystic fibrosis chronically 
infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, as a proxy for bacterial adaptation. We 
identify and describe the bacterial changes and evolution occurring between 15 
and 35 yr of within-host evolution. We combine whole-genome sequencing, RNA 
sequencing, and metabolomics and compare the evolutionary trajectories directed 
by the adaptation of 4 different P. aeruginosa lineages to the lung. Our data 
suggest divergent evolution at the genomic level for most of the genes, with 
signs of convergent evolution with respect to the acquisition of mutations in 
regulatory genes, which drive the transcriptional and metabolomic program at 
late time of evolution. Metabolomics further confirmed convergent adaptive 
phenotypic evolution as documented by the reduction of the quorum-sensing 
molecules acyl-homoserine lactone, phenazines, and rhamnolipids (except for 
quinolones). The modulation of the quorum-sensing repertoire suggests that 
similar selective forces characterize at late times of evolution independent of 
the patient. Collectively, our data suggest that similar environments and 
similar P. aeruginosa populations in the patients at prolonged time of infection 
are associated with an overall reduction of virulence-associated features and 
phenotypic convergence.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae022
PMCID: PMC10883414
PMID: 38366124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Authors declare no 
competing interests.


71. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae004. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae004.

The Density of Regulatory Information Is a Major Determinant of Evolutionary 
Constraint on Noncoding DNA in Drosophila.

Sabarís G(1)(2), Ortíz DM(1), Laiker I(1), Mayansky I(1), Naik S(3), Cavalli 
G(2), Stern DL(4), Preger-Ben Noon E(3), Frankel N(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Neurociencias (IFIBYNE), 
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), 
Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), Buenos Aires 1428, Argentina.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, UMR 9002 CNRS-Université de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, The Rappaport Faculty of 
Medicine and Research Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 
3109601, Israel.
(4)Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA 20147, 
USA.
(5)Departamento de Ecología, Genética y Evolución, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas 
y Naturales (FCEN), Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBA), Buenos Aires 1428, 
Argentina.

Evolutionary analyses have estimated that ∼60% of nucleotides in intergenic 
regions of the Drosophila melanogaster genome are functionally relevant, 
suggesting that regulatory information may be encoded more densely in intergenic 
regions than has been revealed by most functional dissections of regulatory DNA. 
Here, we approached this issue through a functional dissection of the regulatory 
region of the gene shavenbaby (svb). Most of the ∼90 kb of this large regulatory 
region is highly conserved in the genus Drosophila, though characterized 
enhancers occupy a small fraction of this region. By analyzing the regulation of 
svb in different contexts of Drosophila development, we found that the 
regulatory information that drives svb expression in the abdominal pupal 
epidermis is organized in a different way than the elements that drive svb 
expression in the embryonic epidermis. While in the embryonic epidermis svb is 
activated by compact enhancers separated by large inactive DNA regions, svb 
expression in the pupal epidermis is driven by regulatory information 
distributed over broader regions of svb cis-regulatory DNA. In the same vein, we 
observed that other developmental genes also display a dense distribution of 
putative regulatory elements in their regulatory regions. Furthermore, we found 
that a large percentage of conserved noncoding DNA of the Drosophila genome is 
contained within regions of open chromatin. These results suggest that part of 
the evolutionary constraint on noncoding DNA of Drosophila is explained by the 
density of regulatory information, which may be greater than previously 
appreciated.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae004
PMCID: PMC10871701
PMID: 38364113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest. The authors declare no 
competing interests.


72. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae029. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae029.

Biogeographic Perspectives on Human Genetic Diversification.

Hünemeier T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Population Genetics Department, Institute of Evolutionary Biology (IBE - 
CSIC/Universitat Pompeu Fabra), 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

Modern humans originated in Africa 300,000 yr ago, and before leaving their 
continent of origin, they underwent a process of intense diversification 
involving complex demographic dynamics. Upon exiting Africa, different 
populations emerged on the four other inhabited continents, shaped by the 
interplay of various evolutionary processes, such as migrations, founder 
effects, and natural selection. Within each region, continental populations, in 
turn, diversified and evolved almost independently for millennia. As a backdrop 
to this diversification, introgressions from archaic species contributed to 
establishing different patterns of genetic diversity in different geographic 
regions, reshaping our understanding of our species' variability. With the 
increasing availability of genomic data, it has become possible to delineate the 
subcontinental human population structure precisely. However, the bias toward 
the genomic research focused on populations from the global North has limited 
our understanding of the real diversity of our species and the processes and 
events that guided different human groups throughout their evolutionary history. 
This perspective is part of a series of articles celebrating 40 yr since our 
journal, Molecular Biology and Evolution, was founded (Russo et al. 2024). The 
perspective is accompanied by virtual issues, a selection of papers on human 
diversification published by Genome Biology and Evolution and Molecular Biology 
and Evolution.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae029
PMCID: PMC10917211
PMID: 38349332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae002. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae002.

Correction to: Historic Sampling of a Vanishing Beast: Population Structure and 
Diversity in the Black Rhinoceros.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae002
PMCID: PMC10853910
PMID: 38334178


74. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae028. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae028.

Association Analysis Provides Insights into Plant Mitonuclear Interactions.

Lian Q(1), Li S(1)(2), Kan S(1)(3), Liao X(1), Huang S(1)(4), Sloan DB(5), Wu 
Z(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Genomics 
Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen 
518120, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetic Improvement of Horticultural Crops of 
the Ministry of Agriculture, Sino-Dutch Joint Laboratory of Horticultural 
Genomics, Institute of Vegetables and Flowers, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Beijing 100081, China.
(3)Marine College, Shandong University, Weihai 264209, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Tropical Crop Breeding, Chinese Academy of Tropical 
Agricultural Sciences, Haikou 571101, China.
(5)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, 
USA.
(6)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Key 
Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Shenzhen 518120, China.

Cytonuclear interaction refers to the complex and ongoing process of coevolution 
between nuclear and organelle genomes, which are responsible for cellular 
respiration, photosynthesis, lipid metabolism, etc. and play a significant role 
in adaptation and speciation. There have been a large number of studies to 
detect signatures of cytonuclear interactions. However, identification of the 
specific nuclear and organelle genetic polymorphisms that are involved in these 
interactions within a species remains relatively rare. The recent surge in whole 
genome sequencing has provided us an opportunity to explore cytonuclear 
interaction from a population perspective. In this study, we analyzed a total of 
3,439 genomes from 7 species to identify signals of cytonuclear interactions by 
association (linkage disequilibrium) analysis of variants in both the 
mitochondrial and nuclear genomes across flowering plants. We also investigated 
examples of nuclear loci identified based on these association signals using 
subcellular localization assays, gene editing, and transcriptome sequencing. Our 
study provides a novel perspective on the investigation of cytonuclear 
coevolution, thereby enriching our understanding of plant fitness and offspring 
sterility.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae028
PMCID: PMC10875325
PMID: 38324417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae023. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae023.

Mapping Geological Events and Nitrogen Fixation Evolution Onto the Timetree of 
the Evolution of Nitrogen-Fixation Genes.

Pi HW(1)(2), Chiang YR(1), Li WH(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115201, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Soil and Environmental Sciences, National Chung Hsing 
University, Taichung 40227, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60637, USA.

Nitrogen is essential for all organisms, but biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) 
occurs only in a small fraction of prokaryotes. Previous studies divided 
nitrogenase-gene-carrying prokaryotes into Groups I to IV and provided evidence 
that BNF first evolved in bacteria. This study constructed a timetree of the 
evolution of nitrogen-fixation genes and estimated that archaea evolved BNF much 
later than bacteria and that nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria evolved later than 
1,900 MYA, considerably younger than the previous estimate of 2,200 MYA. 
Moreover, Groups III and II/I diverged ∼2,280 MYA, after the Kenorland 
supercontinent breakup (∼2,500-2,100 MYA) and the Great Oxidation Event 
(∼2,400-2,100 MYA); Groups III and Vnf/Anf diverged ∼2,086 MYA, after the 
Yarrabubba impact (∼2,229 MYA); and Groups II and I diverged ∼1,920 MYA, after 
the Vredefort impact (∼2,023 MYA). In summary, this study provided a timescale 
of BNF events and discussed the possible effects of geological events on BNF 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae023
PMCID: PMC10881105
PMID: 38319744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
competing interests.


76. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae027. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae027.

Landscape Heterogeneity Explains the Genetic Differentiation of a Forest Bird 
across the Sino-Himalayan Mountains.

Jiao X(1)(2), Wu L(1)(2), Zhang D(1), Wang H(1)(2), Dong F(3), Yang L(4), Wang 
S(1)(2), Amano HE(5), Zhang W(6), Jia C(1), Rheindt FE(7), Lei F(1)(2), Song 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, China.
(4)Tibet Plateau Institute of Biology, Lhasa 850000, China.
(5)Lake Biwa Museum, Kusatsu, Shiga 525-0001, Japan.
(6)Center for Wildlife Resources Conservation Research, Jiangxi Agricultural 
University, Nanchang, China.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.

Mountains are the world's most important centers of biodiversity. The 
Sino-Himalayan Mountains are global biodiversity hotspot due to their extremely 
high species richness and endemicity. Ample research investigated the impact of 
the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau uplift and Quaternary glaciations in driving species 
diversification in plants and animals across the Sino-Himalayan Mountains. 
However, little is known about the role of landscape heterogeneity and other 
environmental features in driving diversification in this region. We utilized 
whole genomes and phenotypic data in combination with landscape genetic 
approaches to investigate population structure, demography, and genetic 
diversity in a forest songbird species native to the Sino-Himalayan Mountains, 
the red-billed leiothrix (Leiothrix lutea). We identified 5 phylogeographic 
clades, including 1 in the East of China, 1 in Yunnan, and 3 in Tibet, roughly 
consistent with differences in song and plumage coloration but incongruent with 
traditional subspecies boundaries. Isolation-by-resistance model best explained 
population differentiation within L. lutea, with extensive secondary contact 
after allopatric isolation leading to admixture among clades. Ecological niche 
modeling indicated relative stability in the extent of suitable distribution 
areas of the species across Quaternary glacial cycles. Our results underscore 
the importance of mountains in the diversification of this species, given that 
most of the distinct genetic clades are concentrated in a relatively small area 
in the Sino-Himalayan Mountain region, while a single shallow clade populates 
vast lower-lying areas to the east. This study highlights the crucial role of 
landscape heterogeneity in promoting differentiation and provides a deep genomic 
perspective on the mechanisms through which diversity hotspots form.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae027
PMCID: PMC10919924
PMID: 38318973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae024. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae024.

Adaptive Evolution of Nearctic Deepwater Fish Vision: Implications for Assessing 
Functional Variation for Conservation.

Van Nynatten A(1), Duncan AT(2)(3), Lauzon R(3), Sheldon TA(4), Chen SK(5), 
Lovejoy NR(1)(6), Mandrak NE(1)(6), Chang BSW(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science, University of Toronto Scarborough, 
Scarborough, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Natural Resources Management, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Fisheries Assessment Program, Chippewas of Nawash Unceded First Nation, 
Neyaashiinigmiing, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(6)Department of Ecological and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Intraspecific functional variation is critical for adaptation to rapidly 
changing environments. For visual opsins, functional variation can be 
characterized in vitro and often reflects a species' ecological niche but is 
rarely considered in the context of intraspecific variation or the impact of 
recent environmental changes on species of cultural or commercial significance. 
Investigation of adaptation in postglacial lakes can provide key insight into 
how rapid environmental changes impact functional evolution. Here, we report 
evidence for molecular adaptation in vision in 2 lineages of Nearctic fishes 
that are deep lake specialists: ciscoes and deepwater sculpin. We found 
depth-related variation in the dim-light visual pigment rhodopsin that evolved 
convergently in these 2 lineages. In vitro characterization of spectral 
sensitivity of the convergent deepwater rhodopsin alleles revealed blue-shifts 
compared with other more widely distributed alleles. These blue-shifted 
rhodopsin alleles were only observed in deep clear postglacial lakes with 
underwater visual environments enriched in blue light. This provides evidence of 
remarkably rapid and convergent visual adaptation and intraspecific functional 
variation in rhodopsin. Intraspecific functional variation has important 
implications for conservation, and these fishes are of conservation concern and 
great cultural, commercial, and nutritional importance to Indigenous 
communities. We collaborated with the Saugeen Ojibway Nation to develop and test 
a metabarcoding approach that we show is efficient and accurate in recovering 
the ecological distribution of functionally relevant variation in rhodopsin. Our 
approach bridges experimental analyses of protein function and genetics-based 
tools used in large-scale surveys to better understand the ecological extent of 
adaptive functional variation.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae024
PMCID: PMC10896662
PMID: 38314890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae026. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae026.

Substitution Models of Protein Evolution with Selection on Enzymatic Activity.

Ferreiro D(1)(2), Khalil R(1)(2), Sousa SF(3), Arenas M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CINBIO, Universidade de Vigo, 36310 Vigo, Spain.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, Universidade de Vigo, 
36310 Vigo, Spain.
(3)UCIBIO/REQUIMTE, BioSIM, Departamento de Biomedicina, Faculdade de Medicina 
da Universidade do Porto, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal.

Substitution models of evolution are necessary for diverse evolutionary analyses 
including phylogenetic tree and ancestral sequence reconstructions. At the 
protein level, empirical substitution models are traditionally used due to their 
simplicity, but they ignore the variability of substitution patterns among 
protein sites. Next, in order to improve the realism of the modeling of protein 
evolution, a series of structurally constrained substitution models were 
presented, but still they usually ignore constraints on the protein activity. 
Here, we present a substitution model of protein evolution with selection on 
both protein structure and enzymatic activity, and that can be applied to 
phylogenetics. In particular, the model considers the binding affinity of the 
enzyme-substrate complex as well as structural constraints that include the 
flexibility of structural flaps, hydrogen bonds, amino acids backbone radius of 
gyration, and solvent-accessible surface area that are quantified through 
molecular dynamics simulations. We applied the model to the HIV-1 protease and 
evaluated it by phylogenetic likelihood in comparison with the best-fitting 
empirical substitution model and a structurally constrained substitution model 
that ignores the enzymatic activity. We found that accounting for selection on 
the protein activity improves the fitting of the modeled functional regions with 
the real observations, especially in data with high molecular identity, which 
recommends considering constraints on the protein activity in the development of 
substitution models of evolution.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae026
PMCID: PMC10873502
PMID: 38314876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae005. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae005.

Correction to: Extensive Phylogenomic Discordance and the Complex Evolutionary 
History of the Neotropical Cat Genus Leopardus.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae005
PMCID: PMC10837007
PMID: 38307495


80. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae025. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae025.

The Dynamic Interplay Between Ribosomal DNA and Transposable Elements: A 
Perspective From Genomics and Cytogenetics.

Garcia S(1), Kovarik A(2), Maiwald S(3), Mann L(3), Schmidt N(3), Pascual-Díaz 
JP(1), Vitales D(1)(4), Weber B(3), Heitkam T(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institut Botànic de Barcelona (IBB), CSIC-CMCNB, 08038 Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain.
(2)Institute of Biophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 61265 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Technische Universität Dresden, D-01069 Dresden, Germany.
(4)Laboratori de Botànica-Unitat Associada CSIC, Facultat de Farmàcia i Ciències 
de l'Alimentació, Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(5)Institute of Biology, NAWI Graz, Karl-Franzens-Universität, A-8010 Graz, 
Austria.

Although both are salient features of genomes, at first glance ribosomal DNAs 
and transposable elements are genetic elements with not much in common: whereas 
ribosomal DNAs are mainly viewed as housekeeping genes that uphold all prime 
genome functions, transposable elements are generally portrayed as selfish and 
disruptive. These opposing characteristics are also mirrored in other 
attributes: organization in tandem (ribosomal DNAs) versus organization in a 
dispersed manner (transposable elements); evolution in a concerted manner 
(ribosomal DNAs) versus evolution by diversification (transposable elements); 
and activity that prolongs genomic stability (ribosomal DNAs) versus activity 
that shortens it (transposable elements). Re-visiting relevant instances in 
which ribosomal DNA-transposable element interactions have been reported, we 
note that both repeat types share at least four structural and functional 
hallmarks: (1) they are repetitive DNAs that shape genomes in evolutionary 
timescales, (2) they exchange structural motifs and can enter co-evolution 
processes, (3) they are tightly controlled genomic stress sensors playing key 
roles in senescence/aging, and (4) they share common epigenetic marks such as 
DNA methylation and histone modification. Here, we give an overview of the 
structural, functional, and evolutionary characteristics of both ribosomal DNAs 
and transposable elements, discuss their roles and interactions, and highlight 
trends and future directions as we move forward in understanding ribosomal 
DNA-transposable element associations.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae025
PMCID: PMC10946416
PMID: 38306580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae020. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae020.

Positive Selection Drives cis-regulatory Evolution Across the Threespine 
Stickleback Y Chromosome.

Shaw DE(1), Naftaly AS(1), White MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Allele-specific gene expression evolves rapidly on heteromorphic sex 
chromosomes. Over time, the accumulation of mutations on the Y chromosome leads 
to widespread loss of gametolog expression, relative to the X chromosome. It 
remains unclear if expression evolution on degrading Y chromosomes is primarily 
driven by mutations that accumulate through processes of selective interference, 
or if positive selection can also favor the down-regulation of coding regions on 
the Y chromosome that contain deleterious mutations. Identifying the relative 
rates of cis-regulatory sequence evolution across Y chromosomes has been 
challenging due to the limited number of reference assemblies. The threespine 
stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) Y chromosome is an excellent model to 
identify how regulatory mutations accumulate on Y chromosomes due to its 
intermediate state of divergence from the X chromosome. A large number of 
Y-linked gametologs still exist across 3 differently aged evolutionary strata to 
test these hypotheses. We found that putative enhancer regions on the Y 
chromosome exhibited elevated substitution rates and decreased polymorphism when 
compared to nonfunctional sites, like intergenic regions and synonymous sites. 
This suggests that many cis-regulatory regions are under positive selection on 
the Y chromosome. This divergence was correlated with X-biased gametolog 
expression, indicating the loss of expression from the Y chromosome may be 
favored by selection. Our findings provide evidence that Y-linked cis-regulatory 
regions exhibit signs of positive selection quickly after the suppression of 
recombination and allow comparisons with recent theoretical models that suggest 
the rapid divergence of regulatory regions may be favored to mask deleterious 
mutations on the Y chromosome.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae020
PMCID: PMC10899008
PMID: 38306314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interests.


82. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae019. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae019.

Bridge: A New Algorithm for Rooting Orthologous Genes in Large-Scale 
Evolutionary Analyses.

Campos LRS(1), Trefflich S(2), Morais DAA(1), Imparato DO(1), Chagas VS(2), 
Albanus RD(3), Dalmolin RJS(1)(4), Castro MAA(2).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Multidisciplinary Environment-BioME, IMD, Federal University 
of Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, Brazil.
(2)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Laboratory, Federal University of Paraná, 
Curitiba 81520-260, Brazil.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, CB, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, 
Natal, Brazil.

Orthology information has been used for searching patterns in high-dimensional 
data, allowing transferring functional information between species. The key 
concept behind this strategy is that orthologous genes share ancestry to some 
extent. While reconstructing the history of a single gene is feasible with the 
existing computational resources, the reconstruction of entire biological 
systems remains challenging. In this study, we present Bridge, a new algorithm 
designed to infer the evolutionary root of orthologous genes in large-scale 
evolutionary analyses. The Bridge algorithm infers the evolutionary root of a 
given gene based on the distribution of its orthologs in a species tree. The 
Bridge algorithm is implemented in R and can be used either to assess genetic 
changes across the evolutionary history of orthologous groups or to infer the 
onset of specific traits in a biological system.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae019
PMCID: PMC10873778
PMID: 38306290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae018. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae018.

Conservation of Affinity Rather Than Sequence Underlies a Dynamic Evolution of 
the Motif-Mediated p53/MDM2 Interaction in Ray-Finned Fishes.

Mihalič F(1), Arcila D(2), Pettersson ME(1), Farkhondehkish P(1), Andersson 
E(1), Andersson L(1)(3), Betancur-R R(2), Jemth P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, BMC, 
Uppsala SE-75123, Sweden.
(2)Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX 77483, USA.

The transcription factor and cell cycle regulator p53 is marked for degradation 
by the ubiquitin ligase MDM2. The interaction between these 2 proteins is 
mediated by a conserved binding motif in the disordered p53 transactivation 
domain (p53TAD) and the folded SWIB domain in MDM2. The conserved motif in 
p53TAD from zebrafish displays a 20-fold weaker interaction with MDM2, compared 
to the interaction in human and chicken. To investigate this apparent 
difference, we tracked the molecular evolution of the p53TAD/MDM2 interaction 
among ray-finned fishes (Actinopterygii), the largest vertebrate clade. 
Intriguingly, phylogenetic analyses, ancestral sequence reconstructions, and 
binding experiments showed that different loss-of-affinity changes in the 
canonical binding motif within p53TAD have occurred repeatedly and convergently 
in different fish lineages, resulting in relatively low extant affinities (KD = 
0.5 to 5 μM). However, for 11 different fish p53TAD/MDM2 interactions, 
nonconserved regions flanking the canonical motif increased the affinity 4- to 
73-fold to be on par with the human interaction. Our findings suggest that 
compensating changes at conserved and nonconserved positions within the motif, 
as well as in flanking regions of low conservation, underlie a stabilizing 
selection of "functional affinity" in the p53TAD/MDM2 interaction. Such 
interplay complicates bioinformatic prediction of binding and calls for 
experimental validation. Motif-mediated protein-protein interactions involving 
short binding motifs and folded interaction domains are very common across 
multicellular life. It is likely that the evolution of affinity in 
motif-mediated interactions often involves an interplay between specific 
interactions made by conserved motif residues and nonspecific interactions by 
nonconserved disordered regions.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae018
PMCID: PMC10901556
PMID: 38301272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest with the contents of this article.


84. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):msae013. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae013.

Adaptive Capacity of a DNA Polymerase Clamp-loader ATPase Complex.

Subramanian S(1), Zhang W(2), Nimkar S(1), Kamel M(3), O'Donnell M(4), Kuriyan 
J(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, 
USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.

The ability of mutations to facilitate adaptation is central to evolution. To 
understand how mutations can lead to functional adaptation in a complex 
molecular machine, we created a defective version of the T4 clamp-loader 
complex, which is essential for DNA replication. This variant, which is 
∼5,000-fold less active than the wild type, was made by replacing the catalytic 
domains with those from another phage. A directed-evolution experiment revealed 
that multiple substitutions to a single negatively charged residue in the 
chimeric clamp loader-Asp 86-restore fitness to within ∼20-fold of wild type. 
These mutations remove an adventitious electrostatic repulsive interaction 
between Asp 86 and the sliding clamp. Thus, the fitness decrease of the chimeric 
clamp loader is caused by a reduction in affinity between the clamp loader and 
the clamp. Deep mutagenesis shows that the reduced fitness of the chimeric clamp 
loader is also compensated for by lysine and arginine substitutions of several 
DNA-proximal residues in the clamp loader or the sliding clamp. Our results 
demonstrate that there is a latent capacity for increasing the affinity of the 
clamp loader for DNA and the sliding clamp, such that even single-point 
mutations can readily compensate for the loss of function due to suboptimal 
interactions elsewhere.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae013
PMCID: PMC10924251
PMID: 38298175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae015. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae015.

Exploring Adaptive Phenotypes for the Human Calcium-Sensing Receptor 
Polymorphism R990G.

Sinigaglia B(1), Escudero J(1), Biagini SA(1), Garcia-Calleja J(1), Moreno J(2), 
Dobon B(1), Acosta S(1)(3), Mondal M(4)(5), Walsh S(1), Aguileta G(1), Vallès 
M(1), Forrow S(6), Martin-Caballero J(2), Migliano AB(7), Bertranpetit J(1), 
Muñoz FJ(8), Bosch E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (UPF-CSIC), Departament de Medicina i Ciències 
de la Vida, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, 
Barcelona 08003, Spain.
(2)PCB-PRBB Animal Facility Alliance, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, 
Barcelona 08003, Spain.
(3)UB Institute of Neuroscience, Department of Pathology and Experimental 
Therapeutics, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona 08007, Spain.
(4)Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu 51010, Estonia.
(5)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu 
Kiel, Kiel 24118, Germany.
(6)Mouse Mutant Core Facility, Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), 
Barcelona 08028, Spain.
(7)Human Evolutionary Ecology Group, Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, 
University of Zurich, Zurich 8057, Switzerland.
(8)Laboratory of Molecular Physiology, Departament de Medicina i Ciències de la 
Vida, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, 
Barcelona 08003, Spain.

Rainforest hunter-gatherers from Southeast Asia are characterized by specific 
morphological features including a particularly dark skin color (D), short 
stature (S), woolly hair (W), and the presence of steatopygia (S)-fat 
accumulation localized in the hips (DSWS phenotype). Based on previous evidence 
in the Andamanese population, we first characterized signatures of adaptive 
natural selection around the calcium-sensing receptor gene in Southeast Asian 
rainforest groups presenting the DSWS phenotype and identified the R990G 
substitution (rs1042636) as a putative adaptive variant for experimental 
follow-up. Although the calcium-sensing receptor has a critical role in calcium 
homeostasis by directly regulating the parathyroid hormone secretion, it is 
expressed in different tissues and has been described to be involved in many 
biological functions. Previous works have also characterized the R990G 
substitution as an activating polymorphism of the calcium-sensing receptor 
associated with hypocalcemia. Therefore, we generated a knock-in mouse for this 
substitution and investigated organismal phenotypes that could have become 
adaptive in rainforest hunter-gatherers from Southeast Asia. Interestingly, we 
found that mouse homozygous for the derived allele show not only lower serum 
calcium concentration but also greater body weight and fat accumulation, 
probably because of enhanced preadipocyte differentiation and lipolysis 
impairment resulting from the calcium-sensing receptor activation mediated by 
R990G. We speculate that such differential features in humans could have 
facilitated the survival of hunter-gatherer groups during periods of nutritional 
stress in the challenging conditions of the Southeast Asian tropical 
rainforests.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae015
PMCID: PMC10859840
PMID: 38285634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae014. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae014.

Encyclopedia of Family A DNA Polymerases Localized in Organelles: Evolutionary 
Contribution of Bacteria Including the Proto-Mitochondrion.

Harada R(1), Hirakawa Y(2), Yabuki A(3), Kim E(4)(5), Yazaki E(6)(7), Kamikawa 
R(8), Nakano K(1), Eliáš M(9), Inagaki Y(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 
Japan.
(3)Deep-Sea Biodiversity Research Group, Research Institute for Global Change 
(RIGC), Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC), 
Yokosuka, Japan.
(4)Division of EcoScience, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Division of Invertebrate Zoology, American Museum of Natural History, New 
York, NY, USA.
(6)Research Center for Advanced Analysis, National Agriculture and Food Research 
Organization, Tsukuba, Japan.
(7)Interdisciplinary Theoretical and Mathematical Sciences program (iTHEMS), 
RIKEN, Wako, Saitama, Japan.
(8)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(9)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(10)Center for Computational Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

DNA polymerases synthesize DNA from deoxyribonucleotides in a semiconservative 
manner and serve as the core of DNA replication and repair machinery. In 
eukaryotic cells, there are 2 genome-containing organelles, mitochondria, and 
plastids, which were derived from an alphaproteobacterium and a cyanobacterium, 
respectively. Except for rare cases of genome-lacking mitochondria and plastids, 
both organelles must be served by nucleus-encoded DNA polymerases that localize 
and work in them to maintain their genomes. The evolution of organellar DNA 
polymerases has yet to be fully understood because of 2 unsettled issues. First, 
the diversity of organellar DNA polymerases has not been elucidated in the full 
spectrum of eukaryotes. Second, it is unclear when the DNA polymerases that were 
used originally in the endosymbiotic bacteria giving rise to mitochondria and 
plastids were discarded, as the organellar DNA polymerases known to date show no 
phylogenetic affinity to those of the extant alphaproteobacteria or 
cyanobacteria. In this study, we identified from diverse eukaryotes 134 family A 
DNA polymerase sequences, which were classified into 10 novel types, and 
explored their evolutionary origins. The subcellular localizations of selected 
DNA polymerases were further examined experimentally. The results presented here 
suggest that the diversity of organellar DNA polymerases has been shaped by 
multiple transfers of the PolI gene from phylogenetically broad bacteria, and 
their occurrence in eukaryotes was additionally impacted by secondary plastid 
endosymbioses. Finally, we propose that the last eukaryotic common ancestor may 
have possessed 2 mitochondrial DNA polymerases, POP, and a candidate of the 
direct descendant of the proto-mitochondrial DNA polymerase I, rdxPolA, 
identified in this study.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae014
PMCID: PMC10877234
PMID: 38271287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae012. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae012.

Diurnal Rhythms in the Red Seaweed Gracilariopsis chorda are Characterized by 
Unique Regulatory Networks of Carbon Metabolism.

Lee J(1)(2), Yang JH(3), Weber APM(4), Bhattacharya D(5), Kim WY(6), Yoon HS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oceanography, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, 
Korea.
(2)Kyungpook Institute of Oceanography, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 
41566, Korea.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, 
Korea.
(4)Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Cluster of Excellence on Plant Science 
(CEPLAS), Heinrich Heine University, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Rutgers University, New 
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
(6)Division of Applied Life Science (BK21 four), Research Institute of Life 
Science, Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 52828, Korea.

Cellular and physiological cycles are driven by endogenous pacemakers, the 
diurnal and circadian rhythms. Key functions such as cell cycle progression and 
cellular metabolism are under rhythmic regulation, thereby maintaining 
physiological homeostasis. The photoreceptors phytochrome and cryptochrome, in 
response to light cues, are central input pathways for physiological cycles in 
most photosynthetic organisms. However, among Archaeplastida, red algae are the 
only taxa that lack phytochromes. Current knowledge about oscillatory rhythms is 
primarily derived from model species such as Arabidopsis thaliana and 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in the Viridiplantae, whereas little is known about 
these processes in other clades of the Archaeplastida, such as the red algae 
(Rhodophyta). We used genome-wide expression profiling of the red seaweed 
Gracilariopsis chorda and identified 3,098 rhythmic genes. Here, we 
characterized possible cryptochrome-based regulation and 
photosynthetic/cytosolic carbon metabolism in this species. We found a large 
family of cryptochrome genes in G. chorda that display rhythmic expression over 
the diurnal cycle and may compensate for the lack of phytochromes in this 
species. The input pathway gates regulatory networks of carbon metabolism which 
results in a compact and efficient energy metabolism during daylight hours. The 
system in G. chorda is distinct from energy metabolism in most plants, which 
activates in the dark. The green lineage, in particular, land plants, balance 
water loss and CO2 capture in terrestrial environments. In contrast, red 
seaweeds maintain a reduced set of photoreceptors and a compact cytosolic carbon 
metabolism to thrive in the harsh abiotic conditions typical of intertidal 
zones.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae012
PMCID: PMC10853006
PMID: 38267085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare no 
competing interests.


88. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae003. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae003.

Cross-Species Comparative DNA Methylation Reveals Novel Insights into Complex 
Trait Genetics among Cattle, Sheep, and Goats.

Chen S(1), Liu S(2)(3), Shi S(1), Yin H(4), Tang Y(1), Zhang J(1), Li W(1), Liu 
G(5), Qu K(6), Ding X(1), Wang Y(1), Liu J(1), Zhang S(1), Fang L(7), Yu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, State Key Laboratory of 
Animal Biotech Breeding, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Affairs, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing 100193, China.
(2)Westlake Laboratory of Life Sciences and Biomedicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
310024, China.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Westlake University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310024, 
China.
(4)Agriculture Genome Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Shenzhen 518120, China.
(5)National Animal Husbandry Service, Beijing 100125, China.
(6)Academy of Science and Technology, Chuxiong Normal University, Chuxiong 
675000, China.
(7)Center for Quantitative Genetics and Genomics (QGG), Aarhus University, 
Aarhus, Denmark.

The cross-species characterization of evolutionary changes in the functional 
genome can facilitate the translation of genetic findings across species and the 
interpretation of the evolutionary basis underlying complex phenotypes. Yet, 
this has not been fully explored between cattle, sheep, goats, and other 
mammals. Here, we systematically characterized the evolutionary dynamics of DNA 
methylation and gene expression in 3 somatic tissues (i.e. brain, liver, and 
skeletal muscle) and sperm across 7 mammalian species, including 3 ruminant 
livestock species (cattle, sheep, and goats), humans, pigs, mice, and dogs, by 
generating and integrating 160 DNA methylation and transcriptomic data sets. We 
demonstrate dynamic changes of DNA hypomethylated regions and hypermethylated 
regions in tissue-type manner across cattle, sheep, and goats. Specifically, 
based on the phylo-epigenetic model of DNA methylome, we identified a total of 
25,074 hypomethylated region extension events specific to cattle, which 
participated in rewiring tissue-specific regulatory network. Furthermore, by 
integrating genome-wide association studies of 50 cattle traits, we provided 
novel insights into the genetic and evolutionary basis of complex phenotypes in 
cattle. Overall, our study provides a valuable resource for exploring the 
evolutionary dynamics of the functional genome and highlights the importance of 
cross-species characterization of multiomics data sets for the evolutionary 
interpretation of complex phenotypes in cattle livestock.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae003
PMCID: PMC10834038
PMID: 38266195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae010. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae010.

Evolving Together: Cassandra Retrotransposons Gradually Mirror Promoter 
Mutations of the 5S rRNA Genes.

Maiwald S(1), Mann L(1), Garcia S(2), Heitkam T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology, Technische Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany.
(2)Institut Botànic de Barcelona, IBB (CSIC-MCNB), 08038 Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain.
(3)Institute of Biology, NAWI Graz, Karl-Franzens-Universität, 8010 Graz, 
Austria.

The 5S rRNA genes are among the most conserved nucleotide sequences across all 
species. Similar to the 5S preservation we observe the occurrence of 5S-related 
nonautonomous retrotransposons, so-called Cassandras. Cassandras harbor highly 
conserved 5S rDNA-related sequences within their long terminal repeats, 
advantageously providing them with the 5S internal promoter. However, the 
dynamics of Cassandra retrotransposon evolution in the context of 5S rRNA gene 
sequence information and structural arrangement are still unclear, especially: 
(1) do we observe repeated or gradual domestication of the highly conserved 5S 
promoter by Cassandras and (2) do changes in 5S organization such as in the 
linked 35S-5S rDNA arrangements impact Cassandra evolution? Here, we show 
evidence for gradual co-evolution of Cassandra sequences with their 
corresponding 5S rDNAs. To follow the impact of 5S rDNA variability on Cassandra 
TEs, we investigate the Asteraceae family where highly variable 5S rDNAs, 
including 5S promoter shifts and both linked and separated 35S-5S rDNA 
arrangements have been reported. Cassandras within the Asteraceae mirror 5S rDNA 
promoter mutations of their host genome, likely as an adaptation to the host's 
specific 5S transcription factors and hence compensating for evolutionary 
changes in the 5S rDNA sequence. Changes in the 5S rDNA sequence and in 
Cassandras seem uncorrelated with linked/separated rDNA arrangements. We place 
all these observations into the context of angiosperm 5S rDNA-Cassandra 
evolution, discuss Cassandra's origin hypotheses (single or multiple) and 
Cassandra's possible impact on rDNA and plant genome organization, giving new 
insights into the interplay of ribosomal genes and transposable elements.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae010
PMCID: PMC10853983
PMID: 38262464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae011. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae011.

Dynamic Phytomeric Growth Contributes to Local Adaptation in Barley.

Huang Y(1), Maurer A(2), Giehl RFH(1), Zhao S(1), Golan G(1), Thirulogachandar 
V(1), Li G(1), Zhao Y(1), Trautewig C(1), Himmelbach A(1), Börner A(1), Jayakodi 
M(1), Stein N(1)(3), Mascher M(1)(4), Pillen K(2), Schnurbusch T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK), 06466 
Seeland, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Natural Sciences III, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, 
Institute of Agricultural and Nutritional Sciences, 06120 Halle, Germany.
(3)Center for Integrated Breeding Research (CiBreed), Georg-August-University, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(4)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) 
Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Vascular plants have segmented body axes with iterative nodes and internodes. 
Appropriate node initiation and internode elongation are fundamental to plant 
fitness and crop yield; however, how these events are spatiotemporally 
coordinated remains elusive. We show that in barley (Hordeum vulgare L.), 
selections during domestication have extended the apical meristematic phase to 
promote node initiation, but constrained subsequent internode elongation. In 
both vegetative and reproductive phases, internode elongation displays a dynamic 
proximal-distal gradient, and among subpopulations of domesticated barleys 
worldwide, node initiation and proximal internode elongation are associated with 
latitudinal and longitudinal gradients, respectively. Genetic and functional 
analyses suggest that, in addition to their converging roles in node initiation, 
flowering-time genes have been repurposed to specify the timing and duration of 
internode elongation. Our study provides an integrated view of barley node 
initiation and internode elongation and suggests that plant architecture should 
be recognized as a collection of dynamic phytomeric units in the context of crop 
adaptive evolution.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae011
PMCID: PMC10837018
PMID: 38243866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.


91. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae009. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae009.

Genetically Encoded Lizard Color Divergence for Camouflage and Thermoregulation.

Sun BJ(1), Li WM(1), Lv P(2)(3), Wen GN(1), Wu DY(1), Tao SA(1), Liao ML(4), Yu 
CQ(5), Jiang ZW(1), Wang Y(6), Xie HX(1), Wang XF(1), Chen ZQ(7), Liu F(2), Du 
WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(4)The Key Laboratory of Mariculture, Ministry of Education, Fisheries College, 
Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China.
(5)Ecology Laboratory, Beijing Ecotech Science and Technology Ltd, Beijing 
100190, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Animal Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of 
Hebei Province, College of Life Sciences, Hebei Normal University, Shijiazhuang 
050024, China.
(7)Novogene Bioinformatics Institute, Beijing, China.

Local adaptation is critical in speciation and evolution, yet comprehensive 
studies on proximate and ultimate causes of local adaptation are generally 
scarce. Here, we integrated field ecological experiments, genome sequencing, and 
genetic verification to demonstrate both driving forces and molecular mechanisms 
governing local adaptation of body coloration in a lizard from the Qinghai-Tibet 
Plateau. We found dark lizards from the cold meadow population had lower 
spectrum reflectance but higher melanin contents than light counterparts from 
the warm dune population. Additionally, the colorations of both dark and light 
lizards facilitated the camouflage and thermoregulation in their respective 
microhabitat simultaneously. More importantly, by genome resequencing analysis, 
we detected a novel mutation in Tyrp1 that underpinned this color adaptation. 
The allele frequencies at the site of SNP 459# in the gene of Tyrp1 are 22.22% 
G/C and 77.78% C/C in dark lizards and 100% G/G in light lizards. 
Model-predicted structure and catalytic activity showed that this mutation 
increased structure flexibility and catalytic activity in enzyme TYRP1, and 
thereby facilitated the generation of eumelanin in dark lizards. The function of 
the mutation in Tyrp1 was further verified by more melanin contents and darker 
coloration detected in the zebrafish injected with the genotype of Tyrp1 from 
dark lizards. Therefore, our study demonstrates that a novel mutation of a major 
melanin-generating gene underpins skin color variation co-selected by camouflage 
and thermoregulation in a lizard. The resulting strong selection may reinforce 
adaptive genetic divergence and enable the persistence of adjacent populations 
with distinct body coloration.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae009
PMCID: PMC10835340
PMID: 38243850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


92. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae008. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae008.

Mixed Patterns of Intergenerational DNA Methylation Inheritance in Acropora.

Peterson CR(1), Scott CB(1), Ghaffari R(2), Dixon G(3), Matz MV(1).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(2)Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(3)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, TX, USA.

For sessile organisms at high risk from climate change, phenotypic plasticity 
can be critical to rapid acclimation. Epigenetic markers like DNA methylation 
are hypothesized as mediators of plasticity; methylation is associated with the 
regulation of gene expression, can change in response to ecological cues, and is 
a proposed basis for the inheritance of acquired traits. Within reef-building 
corals, gene-body methylation (gbM) can change in response to ecological 
stressors. If coral DNA methylation is transmissible across generations, this 
could potentially facilitate rapid acclimation to environmental change. We 
investigated methylation heritability in Acropora, a stony reef-building coral. 
Two Acropora millepora and two Acropora selago adults were crossed, producing 
eight offspring crosses (four hybrid, two of each species). We used whole-genome 
bisulfite sequencing to identify methylated loci and allele-specific alignments 
to quantify per-locus inheritance. If methylation is heritable, differential 
methylation (DM) between the parents should equal DM between paired offspring 
alleles at a given locus. We found a mixture of heritable and nonheritable loci, 
with heritable portions ranging from 44% to 90% among crosses. gBM was more 
heritable than intergenic methylation, and most loci had a consistent degree of 
heritability between crosses (i.e. the deviation between parental and offspring 
DM were of similar magnitude and direction). Our results provide evidence that 
coral methylation can be inherited but that heritability is heterogenous 
throughout the genome. Future investigations into this heterogeneity and its 
phenotypic implications will be important to understanding the potential 
capability of intergenerational environmental acclimation in reef building 
corals.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae008
PMCID: PMC11079325
PMID: 38243377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


93. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad272. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad272.

Temporal Dynamics, Discovery, and Emergence of Human-Transmissible RNA Viruses.

Lu L(1)(2), Zhang F(2)(3), Brierley L(4), Robertson G(5), Chase-Topping M(1), 
Lycett S(1), Woolhouse M(2).

Author information:
(1)Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)National Institute of Health Data Science at Peking University, Beijing, 
China.
(4)Institute of Population Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, Unitied 
Kingdom.
(5)Biomathematics and Statistics Scotland, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Transmissibility, the ability to spread within host populations, is a 
prerequisite for a pathogen to have epidemic or pandemic potential. Here, we 
estimate the phylogenies of human infectivity and transmissibility using 1,408 
genome sequences from 743 distinct RNA virus species/types in 59 genera. By 
repeating this analysis using data sets censored by virus discovery date, we 
explore how temporal changes in the known diversity of RNA viruses-especially 
recent increases in recognized nonhuman viruses-have altered these phylogenies. 
Over time, we find significant increases in the proportion of RNA virus genera 
estimated to have a nonhuman-infective ancestral state, in the fraction of 
distinct human virus lineages that are purely human-transmissible or strictly 
zoonotic (compared to mixed lineages), and in the number of human viruses with 
nearest relatives known not to infect humans. Our results are consistent with 
viruses that are capable of spreading in human populations commonly emerging 
from a nonhuman reservoir. This is more likely in lineages that already contain 
human-transmissible viruses but is rare in lineages that contain only strictly 
zoonotic viruses.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad272
PMCID: PMC10797954
PMID: 38241079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msae007. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae007.

Ecological Diversification in an Adaptive Radiation of Plants: The Role of De 
Novo Mutation and Introgression.

Stone BW(1), Wessinger CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208-3401, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jan 02;:

Adaptive radiations are characterized by rapid ecological diversification and 
speciation events, leading to fuzzy species boundaries between ecologically 
differentiated species. Adaptive radiations are therefore key systems for 
understanding how species are formed and maintained, including the role of de 
novo mutations versus preexisting variation in ecological adaptation and the 
genome-wide consequences of hybridization events. For example, adaptive 
introgression, where beneficial alleles are transferred between lineages through 
hybridization, may fuel diversification in adaptive radiations and facilitate 
adaptation to new environments. In this study, we employed whole-genome 
resequencing data to investigate the evolutionary origin of 
hummingbird-pollinated flowers and to characterize genome-wide patterns of 
phylogenetic discordance and introgression in Penstemon subgenus Dasanthera, a 
small and diverse adaptive radiation of plants. We found that magenta 
hummingbird-adapted flowers have apparently evolved twice from ancestral 
blue-violet bee-pollinated flowers within this radiation. These shifts in flower 
color are accompanied by a variety of inactivating mutations to a key 
anthocyanin pathway enzyme, suggesting that independent de novo loss-of-function 
mutations underlie the parallel evolution of this trait. Although patterns of 
introgression and phylogenetic discordance were heterogenous across the genome, 
a strong effect of gene density suggests that, in general, natural selection 
opposes introgression and maintains genetic differentiation in gene-rich genomic 
regions. Our results highlight the importance of both de novo mutation and 
introgression as sources of evolutionary change and indicate a role for de novo 
mutation in driving parallel evolution in adaptive radiations.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae007
PMCID: PMC10826641
PMID: 38232726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):msae006. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae006.

Divergent Selection in Low Recombination Regions Shapes the Genomic Islands in 
Two Incipient Shorebird Species.

Zhou W(1)(2), Zhang N(1), Huang K(3), Lin H(1), Tu J(1), Zheng C(1), Que 
P(4)(5), Chiang CY(6), Martinez J(7), Naerhulan H(8), Székely T(1)(4)(8), Zhang 
Z(4), Liu Y(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Ecology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Department of Botany and Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Bc, Canada.
(4)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity Sciences and Ecological 
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Sichuan Key Laboratory of Conservation Biology for Endangered Wildlife, 
Chengdu Research Base of Giant Panda Breeding, Sichuan Academy of Giant Panda, 
Chengdu, China.
(6)Department of Environmental Science, Tunghai University, Taichung, Taiwan, 
China.
(7)14, bis rue des Temples, La Ferté-Saint-Aubin 45240, France.
(8)Milner Centre for Evolution, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, 
University of Bath, Bath, UK.

Speciation in the face of gene flow is usually associated with a heterogeneous 
genomic landscape of divergence in nascent species pairs. However, multiple 
factors, such as divergent selection and local recombination rate variation, can 
influence the formation of these genomic islands. Examination of the genomic 
landscapes of species pairs that are still in the early stages of speciation 
provides an insight into this conundrum. In this study, population genomic 
analyses were undertaken using a wide range of sampling and whole-genome 
resequencing data from 96 unrelated individuals of Kentish plover (Charadrius 
alexandrinus) and white-faced plover (Charadrius dealbatus). We suggest that the 
two species exhibit varying levels of population admixture along the Chinese 
coast and on the Taiwan Island. Genome-wide analyses for introgression indicate 
that ancient introgression had occurred in Taiwan population, and gene flow is 
still ongoing in mainland coastal populations. Furthermore, we identified a few 
genomic regions with significant levels of interspecific differentiation and 
local recombination suppression, which contain several genes potentially 
associated with disease resistance, coloration, and regulation of plumage 
molting and thus may be relevant to the phenotypic and ecological divergence of 
the two nascent species. Overall, our findings suggest that divergent selection 
in low recombination regions may be a main force in shaping the genomic islands 
in two incipient shorebird species.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae006
PMCID: PMC10835341
PMID: 38225175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad260. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad260.

Elevated HIV Viral Load is Associated with Higher Recombination Rate In Vivo.

Romero EV(1), Feder AF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Herbold Computational Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, 
Seattle, WA, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Oct 10;:

HIV's exceptionally high recombination rate drives its intrahost 
diversification, enabling immune escape and multidrug resistance within people 
living with HIV. While we know that HIV's recombination rate varies by genomic 
position, we have little understanding of how recombination varies throughout 
infection or between individuals as a function of the rate of cellular 
coinfection. We hypothesize that denser intrahost populations may have higher 
rates of coinfection and therefore recombination. To test this hypothesis, we 
develop a new approach (recombination analysis via time series linkage decay or 
RATS-LD) to quantify recombination using autocorrelation of linkage between 
mutations across time points. We validate RATS-LD on simulated data under short 
read sequencing conditions and then apply it to longitudinal, high-throughput 
intrahost viral sequencing data, stratifying populations by viral load (a proxy 
for density). Among sampled viral populations with the lowest viral loads 
(<26,800 copies/mL), we estimate a recombination rate of 1.5×10-5 
events/bp/generation (95% CI: 7×10-6 to 2.9×10-5), similar to existing 
estimates. However, among samples with the highest viral loads (>82,000 
copies/mL), our median estimate is approximately 6 times higher. In addition to 
co-varying across individuals, we also find that recombination rate and viral 
load are associated within single individuals across different time points. Our 
findings suggest that rather than acting as a constant, uniform force, 
recombination can vary dynamically and drastically across intrahost viral 
populations and within them over time. More broadly, we hypothesize that this 
phenomenon may affect other facultatively asexual populations where spatial 
co-localization varies.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad260
PMCID: PMC10777272
PMID: 38197289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad264. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad264.

Forty Years of Inferential Methods in the Journals of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution.

Russo CAM(1), Eyre-Walker A(2), Katz LA(3), Gaut BS(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, MA, USA.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/gbe/evae008.

We are launching a series to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the first issue 
of Molecular Biology and Evolution. In 2024, we will publish virtual issues 
containing selected papers published in the Society for Molecular Biology and 
Evolution journals, Molecular Biology and Evolution and Genome Biology and 
Evolution. Each virtual issue will be accompanied by a perspective that 
highlights the historic and contemporary contributions of our journals to a 
specific topic in molecular evolution. This perspective, the first in the 
series, presents an account of the broad array of methods that have been 
published in the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution journals, including 
methods to infer phylogenies, to test hypotheses in a phylogenetic framework, 
and to infer population genetic processes. We also mention many of the software 
implementations that make methods tractable for empiricists. In short, the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution community has much to celebrate 
after four decades of publishing high-quality science including numerous 
important inferential methods.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad264
PMCID: PMC10763999
PMID: 38197288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msae001. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msae001.

Deciphering the Role of Rapidly Evolving Conserved Elements in Primate Brain 
Development and Exploring Their Potential Involvement in Alzheimer's Disease.

Hu B(1), Zhuang XL(1), Zhou L(2)(3), Zhang G(2)(3), Cooper DN(4), Wu DD(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Genetic Evolution & Animal Models, Kunming Natural History 
Museum of Zoology, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)Center of Evolutionary and Organismal Biology, and Women's Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Liangzhu Laboratory, Zhejiang University Medical Center, Hangzhou, Guangdong, 
China.
(4)Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, UK.
(5)National Resource Center for Non-Human Primates, Kunming Primate Research 
Center, and National Research Facility for Phenotypic and Genetic Analysis of 
Model Animals (Primate Facility), Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

Although previous studies have identified human-specific accelerated regions as 
playing a key role in the recent evolution of the human brain, the 
characteristics and cellular functions of rapidly evolving conserved elements 
(RECEs) in ancestral primate lineages remain largely unexplored. Here, based on 
large-scale primate genome assemblies, we identify 888 RECEs that have been 
highly conserved in primates that exhibit significantly accelerated substitution 
rates in the ancestor of the Simiiformes. This primate lineage exhibits 
remarkable morphological innovations, including an expanded brain mass. 
Integrative multiomic analyses reveal that RECEs harbor sequences with potential 
cis-regulatory functions that are activated in the adult human brain. 
Importantly, genes linked to RECEs exhibit pronounced expression trajectories in 
the adult brain relative to the fetal stage. Furthermore, we observed an 
increase in the chromatin accessibility of RECEs in oligodendrocytes from 
individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD) compared to that of a control group, 
indicating that these RECEs may contribute to brain aging and AD. Our findings 
serve to expand our knowledge of the genetic underpinnings of brain function 
during primate evolution.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msae001
PMCID: PMC10798191
PMID: 38175672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


99. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad281. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad281.

Treasurer's Report for Financial Year 2022.

McCutcheon JP(1), Thorne JL(1).

Author information:
(1)SMBE Treasurer.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad281
PMCID: PMC10786193
PMID: 38174624


100. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad287. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad287.

Multiple Origins of Bioluminescence in Beetles and Evolution of Luciferase 
Function.

He J(1)(2), Li J(1)(3), Zhang R(2), Dong Z(1), Liu G(1), Chang Z(1), Bi W(4), 
Ruan Y(5), Yang Y(6), Liu H(6), Qiu L(7), Zhao R(1), Wan W(1), Li Z(2), Chen 
L(2), Li Y(8), Li X(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Genetic Evolution & Animal Models, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China.
(2)School of Ecology and Environment, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 
Xi'an, Shaanxi 710072, China.
(3)Kunming College of Life Science, University of the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650204, China.
(4)Room 401, No. 2, Lane 155, Lianhua South Road, Shanghai 201100, China.
(5)Plant Protection Research Center, Shenzhen Polytechnic University, Shenzhen 
518055, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Application, School of Life 
Science, Institute of Life Science and Green Development, Hebei University, 
Baoding 071002, China.
(7)Engineering Research Center for Forest and Grassland Disaster Prevention and 
Reduction, Mianyang Normal University, 621000 Mianyang, China.
(8)Institute of Marine Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao 
266237, China.

Bioluminescence in beetles has long fascinated biologists, with diverse 
applications in biotechnology. To date, however, our understanding of its 
evolutionary origin and functional variation mechanisms remains poor. To address 
these questions, we obtained high-quality reference genomes of luminous and 
nonluminous beetles in 6 Elateroidea families. We then reconstructed a robust 
phylogenetic relationship for all luminous families and related nonluminous 
families. Comparative genomic analyses and biochemical functional experiments 
suggested that gene evolution within Elateroidea played a crucial role in the 
origin of bioluminescence, with multiple parallel origins observed in the 
luminous beetle families. While most luciferase-like proteins exhibited a 
conserved nonluminous amino acid pattern (TLA346 to 348) in the 
luciferin-binding sites, luciferases in the different luminous beetle families 
showed divergent luminous patterns at these sites (TSA/CCA/CSA/LVA). Comparisons 
of the structural and enzymatic properties of ancestral, extant, and 
site-directed mutant luciferases further reinforced the important role of these 
sites in the trade-off between acyl-CoA synthetase and luciferase activities. 
Furthermore, the evolution of bioluminescent color demonstrated a tendency 
toward hypsochromic shifts and variations among the luminous families. Taken 
together, our results revealed multiple parallel origins of bioluminescence and 
functional divergence within the beetle bioluminescent system.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad287
PMCID: PMC10798137
PMID: 38174583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad288. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad288.

Inference of Infectious Disease Transmission through a Relaxed Bottleneck Using 
Multiple Genomes Per Host.

Carson J(1)(2)(3), Keeling M(1)(2)(3), Wyllie D(4), Ribeca P(4), Didelot 
X(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Mathematics Institute, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(3)Zeeman Institute for Systems Biology and Infectious Disease Epidemiology 
Research (SBIDER), University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
(4)UK Health Security Agency, London NW9 5EQ, UK.
(5)Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.

In recent times, pathogen genome sequencing has become increasingly used to 
investigate infectious disease outbreaks. When genomic data is sampled densely 
enough amongst infected individuals, it can help resolve who infected whom. 
However, transmission analysis cannot rely solely on a phylogeny of the genomes 
but must account for the within-host evolution of the pathogen, which blurs the 
relationship between phylogenetic and transmission trees. When only a single 
genome is sampled for each host, the uncertainty about who infected whom can be 
quite high. Consequently, transmission analysis based on multiple genomes of the 
same pathogen per host has a clear potential for delivering more precise 
results, even though it is more laborious to achieve. Here, we present a new 
methodology that can use any number of genomes sampled from a set of individuals 
to reconstruct their transmission network. Furthermore, we remove the need for 
the assumption of a complete transmission bottleneck. We use simulated data to 
show that our method becomes more accurate as more genomes per host are 
provided, and that it can infer key infectious disease parameters such as the 
size of the transmission bottleneck, within-host growth rate, basic reproduction 
number, and sampling fraction. We demonstrate the usefulness of our method in 
applications to real datasets from an outbreak of Pseudomonas aeruginosa amongst 
cystic fibrosis patients and a nosocomial outbreak of Klebsiella pneumoniae.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad288
PMCID: PMC10798190
PMID: 38168711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad286. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad286.

Transmission Bottleneck Size Estimation from De Novo Viral Genetic Variation.

Shi YT(1), Harris JD(1), Martin MA(1)(2), Koelle K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Graduate Program in Population Biology, Ecology, and Evolution, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Emory Center of Excellence for Influenza Research and Response (CEIRR), 
Atlanta, GA, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Aug 14;:

Sequencing of viral infections has become increasingly common over the last 
decade. Deep sequencing data in particular have proven useful in characterizing 
the roles that genetic drift and natural selection play in shaping within-host 
viral populations. They have also been used to estimate transmission bottleneck 
sizes from identified donor-recipient pairs. These bottleneck sizes quantify the 
number of viral particles that establish genetic lineages in the recipient host 
and are important to estimate due to their impact on viral evolution. Current 
approaches for estimating bottleneck sizes exclusively consider the subset of 
viral sites that are observed as polymorphic in the donor individual. However, 
these approaches have the potential to substantially underestimate true 
transmission bottleneck sizes. Here, we present a new statistical approach for 
instead estimating bottleneck sizes using patterns of viral genetic variation 
that arise de novo within a recipient individual. Specifically, our approach 
makes use of the number of clonal viral variants observed in a transmission 
pair, defined as the number of viral sites that are monomorphic in both the 
donor and the recipient but carry different alleles. We first test our approach 
on a simulated dataset and then apply it to both influenza A virus sequence data 
and SARS-CoV-2 sequence data from identified transmission pairs. Our results 
confirm the existence of extremely tight transmission bottlenecks for these 2 
respiratory viruses.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad286
PMCID: PMC10798134
PMID: 38158742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad285. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad285.

Gene Regulatory Network that Shaped the Evolution of Larval Apical Organ in 
Cnidaria.

Gilbert E(1)(2), Craggs J(3), Modepalli V(1).

Author information:
(1)Marine Biological Association of the UK, The Laboratory, Citadel Hill, 
Plymouth PL1 2PB, UK.
(2)School of Biological and Marine Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth 
PL4 8AA, UK.
(3)Horniman Museum and Gardens, London SE23 3PQ, UK.

Among non-bilaterian animals, a larval apical sensory organ with integrated 
neurons is only found in cnidarians. Within cnidarians, an apical organ with a 
ciliary tuft is mainly found in Actiniaria. Whether this apical tuft has evolved 
independently in Actiniaria or alternatively originated in the common ancestor 
of Cnidaria and Bilateria and was lost in specific groups is uncertain. To test 
this hypothesis, we generated transcriptomes of the apical domain during the 
planula stage of four species representing three key groups of cnidarians: 
Aurelia aurita (Scyphozoa), Nematostella vectensis (Actiniaria), and Acropora 
millepora and Acropora tenuis (Scleractinia). We showed that the canonical genes 
implicated in patterning the apical domain of N. vectensis are largely absent in 
A. aurita. In contrast, the apical domain of the scleractinian planula shares 
gene expression pattern with N. vectensis. By comparing the larval single-cell 
transcriptomes, we revealed the apical organ cell type of Scleractinia and 
confirmed its homology to Actiniaria. However, Fgfa2, a vital regulator of the 
regionalization of the N. vectensis apical organ, is absent in the scleractinian 
genome. Likewise, we found that FoxJ1 and 245 genes associated with cilia are 
exclusively expressed in the N. vectensis apical domain, which is in line with 
the presence of ciliary apical tuft in Actiniaria and its absence in 
Scleractinia and Scyphozoa. Our findings suggest that the common ancestor of 
cnidarians lacked a ciliary apical tuft, and it could have evolved independently 
in the Actiniaria.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad285
PMCID: PMC10781443
PMID: 38152864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


104. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad283. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad283.

The Impact of Recent Demography on Functional Genetic Variation in North African 
Human Groups.

Lucas-Sánchez M(1), Abdeli A(2), Bekada A(3), Calafell F(1), Benhassine T(2), 
Comas D(1).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Medicina i Ciències de la Vida, Institut de Biologia Evolutiva 
(CSIC-UPF), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Faculté des Sciences Biologiques, Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et 
Moléculaire, Université des Sciences et de la Technologie Houari Boumediene, 
Alger, Algeria.
(3)Département de Biotechnologie, Faculté des Sciences de la Nature et de la 
Vie, Université Oran 1 (Ahmad Ben Bella), Oran, Algeria.

The strategic location of North Africa has made the region the core of a wide 
range of human demographic events, including migrations, bottlenecks, and 
admixture processes. This has led to a complex and heterogeneous genetic and 
cultural landscape, which remains poorly studied compared to other world 
regions. Whole-exome sequencing is particularly relevant to determine the 
effects of these demographic events on current-day North Africans' genomes, 
since it allows to focus on those parts of the genome that are more likely to 
have direct biomedical consequences. Whole-exome sequencing can also be used to 
assess the effect of recent demography in functional genetic variation and the 
efficacy of natural selection, a long-lasting debate. In the present work, we 
use newly generated whole-exome sequencing and genome-wide array genotypes to 
investigate the effect of demography in functional variation in 7 North African 
populations, considering both cultural and demographic differences and with a 
special focus on Amazigh (plur. Imazighen) groups. We detect genetic differences 
among populations related to their degree of isolation and the presence of 
bottlenecks in their recent history. We find differences in the functional part 
of the genome that suggest a relaxation of purifying selection in the more 
isolated groups, allowing for an increase of putatively damaging variation. Our 
results also show a shift in mutational load coinciding with major demographic 
events in the region and reveal differences within and between cultural and 
geographic groups.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad283
PMCID: PMC10783648
PMID: 38152862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


105. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad282. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad282.

Inferring Viral Transmission Time from Phylogenies for Known Transmission Pairs.

Goldberg EE(1), Lundgren EJ(1), Romero-Severson EO(1), Leitner T(1).

Author information:
(1)Theoretical Biology and Biophysics, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los 
Alamos, NM, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Nov 16;:

When the time of an HIV transmission event is unknown, methods to identify it 
from virus genetic data can reveal the circumstances that enable transmission. 
We developed a single-parameter Markov model to infer transmission time from an 
HIV phylogeny constructed of multiple virus sequences from people in a 
transmission pair. Our method finds the statistical support for transmission 
occurring in different possible time slices. We compared our time-slice model 
results to previously described methods: a tree-based logical transmission 
interval, a simple parsimony-like rules-based method, and a more complex 
coalescent model. Across simulations with multiple transmitted lineages, 
different transmission times relative to the source's infection, and different 
sampling times relative to transmission, we found that overall our time-slice 
model provided accurate and narrower estimates of the time of transmission. We 
also identified situations when transmission time or direction was difficult to 
estimate by any method, particularly when transmission occurred long after the 
source was infected and when sampling occurred long after transmission. Applying 
our model to real HIV transmission pairs showed some agreement with facts known 
from the case investigations. We also found, however, that uncertainty on the 
inferred transmission time was driven more by uncertainty from time calibration 
of the phylogeny than from the model inference itself. Encouragingly, comparable 
performance of the Markov time-slice model and the coalescent model-which make 
use of different information within a tree-suggests that a new method remains to 
be described that will make full use of the topology and node times for improved 
transmission time inference.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad282
PMCID: PMC10776241
PMID: 38149995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad284. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad284.

Ascertainment Bias in the Genomic Test of Positive Selection on Regulatory 
Sequences.

Jiang D(1)(2), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Present address: Department of Quantitative and Computational Biology, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Aug 21;:

Evolution of gene expression mediated by cis-regulatory changes is thought to be 
an important contributor to organismal adaptation, but identifying adaptive 
cis-regulatory changes is challenging due to the difficulty in knowing the 
expectation under no positive selection. A new approach for detecting positive 
selection on transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) was recently developed, 
thanks to the application of machine learning in predicting transcription factor 
(TF) binding affinities of DNA sequences. Given a TFBS sequence from a focal 
species and the corresponding inferred ancestral sequence that differs from the 
former at n sites, one can predict the TF-binding affinities of many n-step 
mutational neighbors of the ancestral sequence and obtain a null distribution of 
the derived binding affinity, which allows testing whether the binding affinity 
of the real derived sequence deviates significantly from the null distribution. 
Applying this test genomically to all experimentally identified binding sites of 
3 TFs in humans, a recent study reported positive selection for elevated binding 
affinities of TFBSs. Here, we show that this genomic test suffers from an 
ascertainment bias because, even in the absence of positive selection for 
strengthened binding, the binding affinities of known human TFBSs are more 
likely to have increased than decreased in evolution. We demonstrate by computer 
simulation that this bias inflates the false positive rate of the selection 
test. We propose several methods to mitigate the ascertainment bias and show 
that almost all previously reported positive selection signals disappear when 
these methods are applied.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad284
PMCID: PMC10766478
PMID: 38149460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad280. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad280.

Performance of Topology Tests under Extreme Selection Bias.

Markowski E(1)(2), Susko E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
Canada.
(2)Apple Incorporated, Cupertino, CA, USA.

Tree tests like the Kishino-Hasegawa (KH) test and chi-square test suffer a 
selection bias that tests like the Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH) test and 
approximately unbiased test were intended to correct. We investigate 
tree-testing performance in the presence of severe selection bias. The SH test 
is found to be very conservative and, surprisingly, its uncorrected analog, the 
KH test has low Type I error even in the presence of extreme selection bias, 
leading to a recommendation that the SH test be abandoned. A chi-square test is 
found to usually behave well and but to require correction in extreme cases. We 
show how topology testing procedures can be used to get support values for 
splits and compare the likelihood-based support values to the approximate 
likelihood ratio test (aLRT) support values. We find that the aLRT support 
values are reasonable even in settings with severe selection bias that they were 
not designed for. We also show how they can be used to construct tests of 
topologies and, in doing so, point out a multiple comparisons issue that should 
be considered when looking at support values for splits.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad280
PMCID: PMC10773725
PMID: 38142434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest statement: None declared.


108. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad276. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad276.

On the Origin and Evolution of the Mosquito Male-determining Factor Nix.

Biedler JK(1)(2), Aryan A(1)(2), Qi Y(1)(2), Wang A(1)(2), Martinson EO(3), 
Hartman DA(4), Yang F(5), Sharma A(1)(2), Morton KS(1)(2), Potters M(1)(2), Chen 
C(2)(6), Dobson SL(7)(8), Ebel GD(4), Kading RC(4), Paulson S(5), Xue RD(9), 
Strand MR(3), Tu Z(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(2)Fralin Life Sciences Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(3)Department of Entomology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.
(4)Center for Vector-borne Infectious Diseases, Department of Microbiology 
Immunology and Pathology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, 
USA.
(5)Department of Entomology, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(6)Genetics Bioinformatics and Computational Biology PhD program, Virginia Tech, 
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
(7)Department of Entomology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40503, USA.
(8)MosquitoMate, Inc., Lexington, KY 40502, USA.
(9)Anastasia Mosquito Control District, St. Augustine, FL 32092, USA.

The mosquito family Culicidae is divided into 2 subfamilies named the Culicinae 
and Anophelinae. Nix, the dominant male-determining factor, has only been found 
in the culicines Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, 2 important arboviral 
vectors that belong to the subgenus Stegomyia. Here we performed sex-specific 
whole-genome sequencing and RNAseq of divergent mosquito species and explored 
additional male-inclusive datasets to investigate the distribution of Nix. 
Except for the Culex genus, Nix homologs were found in all species surveyed from 
the Culicinae subfamily, including 12 additional species from 3 highly divergent 
tribes comprising 4 genera, suggesting Nix originated at least 133 to 165 
million years ago (MYA). Heterologous expression of 1 of 3 divergent Nix open 
reading frames (ORFs) in Ae. aegypti resulted in partial masculinization of 
genetic females as evidenced by morphology and doublesex splicing. Phylogenetic 
analysis suggests Nix is related to femaleless (fle), a recently described 
intermediate sex-determining factor found exclusively in anopheline mosquitoes. 
Nix from all species has a conserved structure, including 3 RNA-recognition 
motifs (RRMs), as does fle. However, Nix has evolved at a much faster rate than 
fle. The RRM3 of both Nix and fle are distantly related to the single RRM of a 
widely distributed and conserved splicing factor transformer-2 (tra2). The 
RRM3-based phylogenetic analysis suggests this domain in Nix and fle may have 
evolved from tra2 or a tra2-related gene in a common ancestor of mosquitoes. Our 
results provide insights into the evolution of sex determination in mosquitoes 
and will inform broad applications of mosquito-control strategies based on 
manipulating sex ratios toward nonbiting males.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad276
PMCID: PMC10798136
PMID: 38128148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad278. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad278.

Comparative Genome Microsynteny Illuminates the Fast Evolution of Nuclear 
Mitochondrial Segments (NUMTs) in Mammals.

Uvizl M(1)(2), Puechmaille SJ(3)(4), Power S(5), Pippel M(6)(7), Carthy S(5), 
Haerty W(8)(9), Myers EW(6), Teeling EC(5), Huang Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, National Museum, 19300 Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, 12844 Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier (ISEM), University of 
Montpellier, 34095 Montpellier, France.
(4)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France.
(5)School of Biology and Environmental Science, University College Dublin, 
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
(6)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden, 
Germany.
(7)National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden, Uppsala, Sweden.
(8)Earlham Institute, Norwich Research Park, Colney Ln, NR4 7UZ Norwich, UK.
(9)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

The escape of DNA from mitochondria into the nuclear genome (nuclear 
mitochondrial DNA, NUMT) is an ongoing process. Although pervasively observed in 
eukaryotic genomes, their evolutionary trajectories in a mammal-wide context are 
poorly understood. The main challenge lies in the orthology assignment of NUMTs 
across species due to their fast evolution and chromosomal rearrangements over 
the past 200 million years. To address this issue, we systematically 
investigated the characteristics of NUMT insertions in 45 mammalian genomes and 
established a novel, synteny-based method to accurately predict orthologous 
NUMTs and ascertain their evolution across mammals. With a series of comparative 
analyses across taxa, we revealed that NUMTs may originate from nonrandom 
regions in mtDNA, are likely found in transposon-rich and intergenic regions, 
and unlikely code for functional proteins. Using our synteny-based approach, we 
leveraged 630 pairwise comparisons of genome-wide microsynteny and predicted the 
NUMT orthology relationships across 36 mammals. With the phylogenetic patterns 
of NUMT presence-and-absence across taxa, we constructed the ancestral state of 
NUMTs given the mammal tree using a coalescent method. We found support on the 
ancestral node of Fereuungulata within Laurasiatheria, whose subordinal 
relationships are still controversial. This study broadens our knowledge on NUMT 
insertion and evolution in mammalian genomes and highlights the merit of NUMTs 
as alternative genetic markers in phylogenetic inference.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad278
PMCID: PMC10764098
PMID: 38124445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no 
competing interests.


110. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad279. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad279.

Methods for Estimating Personal Disease Risk and Phylogenetic Diversity of 
Hematopoietic Stem Cells.

Craig JM(1)(2), Gerhard GS(3), Sharma S(1)(2), Yankovskiy A(1)(2), Miura 
S(1)(2), Kumar S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Biochemistry, Lewis Katz School 
of Medicine, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

An individual's chronological age does not always correspond to the health of 
different tissues in their body, especially in cases of disease. Therefore, 
estimating and contrasting the physiological age of tissues with an individual's 
chronological age may be a useful tool to diagnose disease and its progression. 
In this study, we present novel metrics to quantify the loss of phylogenetic 
diversity in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), which are precursors to most blood 
cell types and are associated with many blood-related diseases. These metrics 
showed an excellent correspondence with an age-related increase in blood cancer 
incidence, enabling a model to estimate the phylogeny-derived age (phyloAge) of 
HSCs present in an individual. The HSC phyloAge was generally older than the 
chronological age of patients suffering from myeloproliferative neoplasms 
(MPNs). We present a model that relates excess HSC aging with increased MPN 
risk. It predicted an over 200 times greater risk based on the HSC phylogenies 
of the youngest MPN patients analyzed. Our new metrics are designed to be robust 
to sampling biases and do not rely on prior knowledge of driver mutations or 
physiological assessments. Consequently, they complement conventional 
biomarker-based methods to estimate physiological age and disease risk.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad279
PMCID: PMC10768883
PMID: 38124397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad277. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad277.

Simulations of Sequence Evolution: How (Un)realistic They Are and Why.

Trost J(1), Haag J(2), Höhler D(2), Jacob L(3), Stamatakis A(2)(4)(5), Boussau 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Biometry and Evolutionary Biology Laboratory (LBBE), University Claude 
Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
(2)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)CNRS, IBPS, Laboratory of Computational and Quantitative Biology (LCQB), UMR 
7238, Sorbonne Université, Paris 75005, France.
(4)Biodiversity Computing Group, Institute of Computer Science, Foundation for 
Research and Technology - Hellas, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
(5)Institute for Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
Karlsruhe, Germany.

MOTIVATION: Simulating multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) using probabilistic 
models of sequence evolution plays an important role in the evaluation of 
phylogenetic inference tools and is crucial to the development of novel 
learning-based approaches for phylogenetic reconstruction, for instance, neural 
networks. These models and the resulting simulated data need to be as realistic 
as possible to be indicative of the performance of the developed tools on 
empirical data and to ensure that neural networks trained on simulations perform 
well on empirical data. Over the years, numerous models of evolution have been 
published with the goal to represent as faithfully as possible the sequence 
evolution process and thus simulate empirical-like data. In this study, we 
simulated DNA and protein MSAs under increasingly complex models of evolution 
with and without insertion/deletion (indel) events using a state-of-the-art 
sequence simulator. We assessed their realism by quantifying how accurately 
supervised learning methods are able to predict whether a given MSA is simulated 
or empirical.
RESULTS: Our results show that we can distinguish between empirical and 
simulated MSAs with high accuracy using two distinct and independently developed 
classification approaches across all tested models of sequence evolution. Our 
findings suggest that the current state-of-the-art models fail to accurately 
replicate several aspects of empirical MSAs, including site-wise rates as well 
as amino acid and nucleotide composition.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad277
PMCID: PMC10768886
PMID: 38124381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad266. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad266.

Co-option of an Astacin Metalloprotease Is Associated with an Evolutionarily 
Novel Feeding Morphology in a Predatory Nematode.

Ishita Y(1), Onodera A(1), Ekino T(2), Chihara T(1)(3), Okumura M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Program of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for 
Life, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan.
(2)School of Agriculture, Meiji University, Kawasaki 214-8571, Japan.
(3)Program of Basic Biology, Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, 
Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8526, Japan.

Animals consume a wide variety of food sources to adapt to different 
environments. However, the genetic mechanisms underlying the acquisition of 
evolutionarily novel feeding morphology remain largely unknown. While the 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans feeds on bacteria, the satellite species 
Pristionchus pacificus exhibits predatory feeding behavior toward other 
nematodes, which is an evolutionarily novel feeding habit. Here, we found that 
the astacin metalloprotease Ppa-NAS-6 is required for the predatory killing by 
P. pacificus. Ppa-nas-6 mutants were defective in predation-associated 
characteristics, specifically the tooth morphogenesis and tooth movement during 
predation. Comparison of expression patterns and rescue experiments of nas-6 in 
P. pacificus and C. elegans suggested that alteration of the spatial expression 
patterns of NAS-6 may be vital for acquiring predation-related traits. Reporter 
analysis of the Ppa-nas-6 promoter in C. elegans revealed that the alteration in 
expression patterns was caused by evolutionary changes in cis- and 
trans-regulatory elements. This study suggests that the co-option of a 
metalloprotease is involved in an evolutionarily novel feeding morphology.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad266
PMCID: PMC10753534
PMID: 38105444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


113. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad267. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad267.

Ursa: A Comprehensive Multiomics Toolbox for High-Throughput Single-Cell 
Analysis.

Pan L(1)(2), Mou T(3), Huang Y(2), Hong W(4), Yu M(5), Li X(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Solna 171 65, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Solna 171 65, Sweden.
(3)School of Biomedical Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 
518060, China.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200032, China.
(5)Department of General Surgery, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital 
(Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong 510515, China.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Solna 171 65, Sweden.
(7)Department of General Surgery, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital, China Medical 
University, Shenyang 110032, China.

The burgeoning amount of single-cell data has been accompanied by revolutionary 
changes to computational methods to map, quantify, and analyze the outputs of 
these cutting-edge technologies. Many are still unable to reap the benefits of 
these advancements due to the lack of bioinformatics expertise. To address this 
issue, we present Ursa, an automated single-cell multiomics R package containing 
6 automated single-cell omics and spatial transcriptomics workflows. Ursa allows 
scientists to carry out post-quantification single or multiomics analyses in 
genomics, transcriptomics, epigenetics, proteomics, and immunomics at the 
single-cell level. It serves as a 1-stop analytic solution by providing users 
with outcomes to quality control assessments, multidimensional analyses such as 
dimension reduction and clustering, and extended analyses such as pseudotime 
trajectory and gene-set enrichment analyses. Ursa aims bridge the gap between 
those with bioinformatics expertise and those without by providing an 
easy-to-use bioinformatics package for scientists in hoping to accelerate their 
research potential. Ursa is freely available at 
https://github.com/singlecellomics/ursa.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad267
PMCID: PMC10752348
PMID: 38091963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


114. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad275. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad275.

DNA Conserved in Diverse Animals Since the Precambrian Controls Genes for 
Embryonic Development.

Frith MC(1)(2)(3), Ni S(2).

Author information:
(1)Artificial Intelligence Research Center, AIST, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Computational Bio Big Data Open Innovation Laboratory, AIST, Tokyo, Japan.

DNA that controls gene expression (e.g. enhancers, promoters) has seemed almost 
never to be conserved between distantly related animals, like vertebrates and 
arthropods. This is mysterious, because development of such animals is partly 
organized by homologous genes with similar complex expression patterns, termed 
"deep homology." Here, we report 25 regulatory DNA segments conserved across 
bilaterian animals, of which 7 are also conserved in cnidaria (coral and sea 
anemone). They control developmental genes (e.g. Nr2f, Ptch, Rfx1/3, Sall, 
Smad6, Sp5, Tbx2/3), including six homeobox genes: Gsx, Hmx, Meis, Msx, Six1/2, 
and Zfhx3/4. The segments contain perfectly or near-perfectly conserved CCAAT 
boxes, E-boxes, and other sequences recognized by regulatory proteins. More such 
DNA conservation will surely be found soon, as more genomes are published and 
sequence comparison is optimized. This reveals a control system for animal 
development conserved since the Precambrian.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad275
PMCID: PMC10735318
PMID: 38085182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad270. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad270.

A Fast, Reproducible, High-throughput Variant Calling Workflow for Population 
Genomics.

Mirchandani CD(1)(2), Shultz AJ(3), Thomas GWC(4), Smith SJ(4)(5), Baylis 
M(1)(2), Arnold B(6)(7), Corbett-Detig R(1)(2), Enbody E(1), Sackton TB(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.
(2)Genomics Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 
95064, USA.
(3)Ornithology Department, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, Los 
Angeles, CA 90007, USA.
(4)Informatics Group, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Biology, Mount Royal University, Calgary, AB T3E 6K6, Canada.
(6)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(7)Center for Statistics and Machine Learning, Princeton University, Princeton, 
NJ, USA.

The increasing availability of genomic resequencing data sets and high-quality 
reference genomes across the tree of life present exciting opportunities for 
comparative population genomic studies. However, substantial challenges prevent 
the simple reuse of data across different studies and species, arising from 
variability in variant calling pipelines, data quality, and the need for 
computationally intensive reanalysis. Here, we present snpArcher, a flexible and 
highly efficient workflow designed for the analysis of genomic resequencing data 
in nonmodel organisms. snpArcher provides a standardized variant calling 
pipeline and includes modules for variant quality control, data visualization, 
variant filtering, and other downstream analyses. Implemented in Snakemake, 
snpArcher is user-friendly, reproducible, and designed to be compatible with 
high-performance computing clusters and cloud environments. To demonstrate the 
flexibility of this pipeline, we applied snpArcher to 26 public resequencing 
data sets from nonmammalian vertebrates. These variant data sets are hosted 
publicly to enable future comparative population genomic analyses. With its 
extensibility and the availability of public data sets, snpArcher will 
contribute to a broader understanding of genetic variation across species by 
facilitating the rapid use and reuse of large genomic data sets.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad270
PMCID: PMC10764099
PMID: 38069903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


116. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad273. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad273.

Mapping and Functional Dissection of the Rumpless Trait in Piao Chicken 
Identifies a Causal Loss of Function Mutation in the Novel Gene Rum.

Guo Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Tian J(1)(2)(5), Song C(6), Han W(6), Zhu C(6), Li H(6), 
Zhang S(6), Chen K(6), Li N(1)(2), Carlborg Ö(4), Hu X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Biotech Breeding, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing CN-100193, China.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing CN-100193, China.
(3)Yazhouwan National Laboratory, Sanya CN-572024, China.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala SE-751 23, Sweden.
(5)Inner Mongolia Academy of Agricultural & Animal Husbandry Sciences, Hohhot 
CN-010031, China.
(6)National Chickens Genetic Resources, Jiangsu Institute of Poultry Science, 
Yangzhou CN-225125, Jiangsu, China.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Mar 1;41(3):

Rumpless chickens exhibit an abnormality in their tail development. The genetics 
and biology of this trait has been studied for decades to illustrate a broad 
variation in both the types of inheritance and the severity in the developmental 
defects of the tail. In this study, we created a backcross pedigree by 
intercrossing Piao (rumpless) with Xianju (normal) to investigate the genetic 
mechanisms and molecular basis of the rumpless trait in Piao chicken. Through 
genome-wide association and linkage analyses, the candidate region was 
fine-mapped to 798.5 kb (chromosome 2: 86.9 to 87.7 Mb). Whole-genome sequencing 
analyses identified a single variant, a 4.2 kb deletion, which was completely 
associated with the rumpless phenotype. Explorations of the expression data 
identified a novel causative gene, Rum, that produced a long, intronless 
transcript across the deletion. The expression of Rum is embryo-specific, and it 
regulates the expression of MSGN1, a key factor in regulating T-box 
transcription factors required for mesoderm formation and differentiation. These 
results provide genetic and molecular experimental evidence for a novel 
mechanism regulating tail development in chicken and report the likely causal 
mutation for the tail abnormity in the Piao chicken. The novel regulatory gene, 
Rum, will, due to its role in fundamental embryo development, be of interest for 
further explorations of a potential role in tail and skeletal development also 
in other vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad273
PMCID: PMC10735294
PMID: 38069902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad271. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad271.

Phylloxera and Aphids Show Distinct Features of Genome Evolution Despite Similar 
Reproductive Modes.

Li Z(1), Xue AZ(1), Maeda GP(1), Li Y(1)(2), Nabity PD(3), Moran NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
TX 78712, USA.
(2)Institute of Plant Virology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, 
China.
(3)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, University of California Riverside, 
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Aug 29;:

Genomes of aphids (family Aphididae) show several unusual evolutionary patterns. 
In particular, within the XO sex determination system of aphids, the X 
chromosome exhibits a lower rate of interchromosomal rearrangements, fewer 
highly expressed genes, and faster evolution at nonsynonymous sites compared 
with the autosomes. In contrast, other hemipteran lineages have similar rates of 
interchromosomal rearrangement for autosomes and X chromosomes. One possible 
explanation for these differences is the aphid's life cycle of cyclical 
parthenogenesis, where multiple asexual generations alternate with 1 sexual 
generation. If true, we should see similar features in the genomes of 
Phylloxeridae, an outgroup of aphids which also undergoes cyclical 
parthenogenesis. To investigate this, we generated a chromosome-level assembly 
for the grape phylloxera, an agriculturally important species of Phylloxeridae, 
and identified its single X chromosome. We then performed synteny analysis using 
the phylloxerid genome and 30 high-quality genomes of aphids and other 
hemipteran species. Unexpectedly, we found that the phylloxera does not share 
aphids' patterns of chromosome evolution. By estimating interchromosomal 
rearrangement rates on an absolute time scale, we found that rates are elevated 
for aphid autosomes compared with their X chromosomes, but this pattern does not 
extend to the phylloxera branch. Potentially, the conservation of X chromosome 
gene content is due to selection on XO males that appear in the sexual 
generation. We also examined gene duplication patterns across Hemiptera and 
uncovered horizontal gene transfer events contributing to phylloxera evolution.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad271
PMCID: PMC10748745
PMID: 38069672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad274. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad274.

DNA Polymerase Diversity Reveals Multiple Incursions of Polintons During 
Nematode Evolution.

Jeong DE(1), Sundrani S(2)(3), Hall RN(2), Krupovic M(4), Koonin EV(5), Fire 
AZ(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Present address: Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.
(4)Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Archaeal Virology Unit, Paris, 
France.
(5)National National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of 
Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 
USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Aug 24;:

Polintons are double-stranded DNA, virus-like self-synthesizing transposons 
widely found in eukaryotic genomes. Recent metagenomic discoveries of 
Polinton-like viruses are consistent with the hypothesis that Polintons invade 
eukaryotic host genomes through infectious viral particles. Nematode genomes 
contain multiple copies of Polintons and provide an opportunity to explore the 
natural distribution and evolution of Polintons during this process. We 
performed an extensive search of Polintons across nematode genomes, identifying 
multiple full-length Polinton copies in several species. We provide evidence of 
both ancient Polinton integrations and recent mobility in strains of the same 
nematode species. In addition to the major nematode Polinton family, we 
identified a group of Polintons that are overall closely related to the major 
family but encode a distinct protein-primed DNA polymerase B (pPolB) that is 
related to homologs from a different group of Polintons present outside of the 
Nematoda. Phylogenetic analyses on the pPolBs support the evolutionary scenarios 
in which these extrinsic pPolBs that seem to derive from Polinton families 
present in oomycetes and molluscs replaced the canonical pPolB in subsets of 
Polintons found in terrestrial and marine nematodes, respectively, suggesting 
interphylum horizontal gene transfers. The pPolBs of the terrestrial nematode 
and oomycete Polintons share a unique feature, an insertion of an HNH nuclease 
domain, whereas the pPolBs in the marine nematode Polintons share an insertion 
of a VSR nuclease domain with marine mollusc pPolBs. We hypothesize that 
horizontal gene transfer occurs among Polintons from widely different but 
cohabiting hosts.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad274
PMCID: PMC10748475
PMID: 38069639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad268. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad268.

Functional Prokaryotic-Like Deoxycytidine Triphosphate Deaminases and 
Thymidylate Synthase in Eukaryotic Social Amoebae: Vertical, Endosymbiotic, or 
Horizontal Gene Transfer?

Liang H(1), Mower JP(2), Chia CP(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 
68588, USA.
(2)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, NE 68588, USA.

The de novo synthesis of deoxythymidine triphosphate uses several pathways: 
gram-negative bacteria use deoxycytidine triphosphate deaminase to convert 
deoxycytidine triphosphate into deoxyuridine triphosphate, whereas eukaryotes 
and gram-positive bacteria instead use deoxycytidine monophosphate deaminase to 
transform deoxycytidine monophosphate to deoxyuridine monophosphate. It is then 
unusual that in addition to deoxycytidine monophosphate deaminases, the 
eukaryote Dictyostelium discoideum has 2 deoxycytidine triphosphate deaminases 
(Dcd1Dicty and Dcd2Dicty). Expression of either DcdDicty can fully rescue the 
slow growth of an Escherichia coli dcd knockout. Both DcdDicty mitigate the 
hydroxyurea sensitivity of a Schizosaccharomyces pombe deoxycytidine 
monophosphate deaminase knockout. Phylogenies show that Dcd1Dicty homologs may 
have entered the common ancestor of the eukaryotic groups of Amoebozoa, Obazoa, 
Metamonada, and Discoba through an ancient horizontal gene transfer from a 
prokaryote or an ancient endosymbiotic gene transfer from a mitochondrion, 
followed by horizontal gene transfer from Amoebozoa to several other unrelated 
groups of eukaryotes. In contrast, the Dcd2Dicty homologs were a separate 
horizontal gene transfer from a prokaryote or a virus into either Amoebozoa or 
Rhizaria, followed by a horizontal gene transfer between them. ThyXDicty, the D. 
discoideum thymidylate synthase, another enzyme of the deoxythymidine 
triphosphate biosynthesis pathway, was suggested previously to be acquired from 
the ancestral mitochondria or by horizontal gene transfer from 
alpha-proteobacteria. ThyXDicty can fully rescue the E. coli thymidylate 
synthase knockout, and we establish that it was obtained by the common ancestor 
of social amoebae not from mitochondria but from a bacterium. We propose 
horizontal gene transfer and endosymbiotic gene transfer contributed to the 
enzyme diversity of the deoxythymidine triphosphate synthesis pathway in most 
social amoebae, many Amoebozoa, and other eukaryotes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad268
PMCID: PMC10733785
PMID: 38064674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no competing interests to 
declare.


120. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad269. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad269.

Parasitoid Serpins Evolve Novel Functions to Manipulate Host Homeostasis.

Wu Z(1)(2)(3)(4), Yuan R(1)(3)(4), Gu Q(1)(3)(4), Wu X(1)(2)(3)(4), Gu 
L(1)(3)(4), Ye X(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhou Y(1)(3)(4), Huang J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Wang 
Z(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Chen X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Insect Sciences, College of Agriculture and Biotechnology, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Lab for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Ministry of Agriculture Key Lab of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and 
Insect Pests, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects of Zhejiang Province, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(5)State Key Lab of Rice Biology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(6)The Rural Development Academy, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Parasitoids introduce various virulence factors when parasitism occurs, and some 
taxa generate teratocytes to manipulate the host immune system and metabolic 
homeostasis for the survival and development of their progeny. Host-parasitoid 
interactions are extremely diverse and complex, yet the evolutionary dynamics 
are still poorly understood. A category of serpin genes, named CvT-serpins, was 
discovered to be specifically expressed and secreted by the teratocytes of 
Cotesia vestalis, an endoparasitoid of the diamondback moth Plutella xylostella. 
Genomic and phylogenetic analysis indicated that the C. vestalis serpin genes 
are duplicated and most of them are clustered into 1 monophyletic clade. Intense 
positive selection was detected at the residues around the P1-P1' cleavage sites 
of the Cv-serpin reactive center loop domain. Functional analyses revealed that, 
in addition to the conserved function of melanization inhibition (CvT-serpins 1, 
16, 18, and 21), CvT-serpins exhibited novel functions, i.e. bacteriostasis 
(CvT-serpins 3 and 5) and nutrient metabolism regulation (CvT-serpins 8 and 10). 
When the host-parasitoid system is challenged with foreign bacteria, CvT-serpins 
act as an immune regulator to reprogram the host immune system through sustained 
inhibition of host melanization while simultaneously functioning as immune 
effectors to compensate for this suppression. In addition, we provided evidence 
that CvT-serpin8 and 10 participate in the regulation of host trehalose and 
lipid levels by affecting genes involved in these metabolic pathways. These 
findings illustrate an exquisite tactic by which parasitoids win out in the 
parasite-host evolutionary arms race by manipulating host immune and nutrition 
homeostasis via adaptive gene evolution and neofunctionalization.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad269
PMCID: PMC10735303
PMID: 38061001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


121. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad265. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad265.

Interchromosomal Colocalization with Parental Genes Is Linked to the Function 
and Evolution of Mammalian Retrocopies.

Yan Y(1), Tian Y(1), Wu Z(1), Zhang K(1), Yang R(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.

Retrocopies are gene duplicates arising from reverse transcription of mature 
mRNA transcripts and their insertion back into the genome. While long being 
regarded as processed pseudogenes, more and more functional retrocopies have 
been discovered. How the stripped-down retrocopies recover expression capability 
and become functional paralogs continually intrigues evolutionary biologists. 
Here, we investigated the function and evolution of retrocopies in the context 
of 3D genome organization. By mapping retrocopy-parent pairs onto 
sequencing-based and imaging-based chromatin contact maps in human and mouse 
cell lines and onto Hi-C interaction maps in 5 other mammals, we found that 
retrocopies and their parental genes show a higher-than-expected 
interchromosomal colocalization frequency. The spatial interactions between 
retrocopies and parental genes occur frequently at loci in active 
subcompartments and near nuclear speckles. Accordingly, colocalized retrocopies 
are more actively transcribed and translated and are more evolutionarily 
conserved than noncolocalized ones. The active transcription of colocalized 
retrocopies may result from their permissive epigenetic environment and shared 
regulatory elements with parental genes. Population genetic analysis of 
retroposed gene copy number variants in human populations revealed that 
retrocopy insertions are not entirely random in regard to interchromosomal 
interactions and that colocalized retroposed gene copy number variants are more 
likely to reach high frequencies, suggesting that both insertion bias and 
natural selection contribute to the colocalization of retrocopy-parent pairs. 
Further dissection implies that reduced selection efficacy, rather than positive 
selection, contributes to the elevated allele frequency of colocalized 
retroposed gene copy number variants. Overall, our results hint a role of 
interchromosomal colocalization in the "resurrection" of initially neutral 
retrocopies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad265
PMCID: PMC10733166
PMID: 38060983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad262. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad262.

An Ancestral Major Histocompatibility Complex Organization in Cartilaginous 
Fish: Reconstructing MHC Origin and Evolution.

Veríssimo A(1)(2), Castro LFC(3)(4), Muñoz-Mérida A(1)(2), Almeida T(1)(2), 
Gaigher A(1)(2)(5)(6), Neves F(1)(2), Flajnik MF(7), Ohta Y(7).

Author information:
(1)CIBIO-InBIO, Research Center in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, 
University of Porto, Vairão 4485-661, Portugal.
(2)BIOPOLIS Program in Genomics, Biodiversity and Land Planning, CIBIO, Vairão 
4485-661, Portugal.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto 
4169-007, Portugal.
(4)CIIMAR, Centro Interdisciplinar de Investigação Marinha e Ambiental, 
Universidade do Porto, Matosinhos, Portugal.
(5)Research Group for Evolutionary Immunogenomics, Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(6)Research Unit for Evolutionary Immunogenomics, Department of Biology, 
University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Cartilaginous fish (sharks, rays, and chimeras) comprise the oldest living jawed 
vertebrates with a mammalian-like adaptive immune system based on 
immunoglobulins (Ig), T-cell receptors (TCRs), and the major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC). Here, we show that the cartilaginous fish "adaptive MHC" is 
highly regimented and compact, containing (i) a classical MHC class Ia (MHC-Ia) 
region containing antigen processing (antigen peptide transporters and 
immunoproteasome) and presenting (MHC-Ia) genes, (ii) an MHC class II (MHC-II) 
region (with alpha and beta genes) with linkage to beta-2-microglobulin (β2m) 
and bromodomain-containing 2, (iii) nonclassical MHC class Ib (MHC-Ib) regions 
with 450 million-year-old lineages, and (iv) a complement C4 associated with the 
MHC-Ia region. No MHC-Ib genes were found outside of the elasmobranch MHC. Our 
data suggest that both MHC-I and MHC-II genes arose after the second round of 
whole-genome duplication (2R) on a human chromosome (huchr) 6 precursor. Further 
analysis of MHC paralogous regions across early branching taxa from all jawed 
vertebrate lineages revealed that Ig/TCR genes likely arose on a precursor of 
the huchr9/12/14 MHC paralog. The β2m gene is linked to the Ig/TCR genes in some 
vertebrates suggesting that it was present at 1R, perhaps as the donor of C1 
domain to the primordial MHC gene. In sum, extant cartilaginous fish exhibit a 
conserved and prototypical MHC genomic organization with features found in 
various vertebrates, reflecting the ancestral arrangement for the jawed 
vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad262
PMCID: PMC10751288
PMID: 38059517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


123. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad263. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad263.

Molluscan Genomes Reveal Extensive Differences in Photopigment Evolution Across 
the Phylum.

McElroy KE(1), Audino JA(1)(2), Serb JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Ecology, Evolutionary, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, 
IA, USA.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

In animals, opsins and cryptochromes are major protein families that transduce 
light signals when bound to light-absorbing chromophores. Opsins are involved in 
various light-dependent processes, like vision, and have been co-opted for 
light-independent sensory modalities. Cryptochromes are important photoreceptors 
in animals, generally regulating circadian rhythm, they belong to a larger 
protein family with photolyases, which repair UV-induced DNA damage. Mollusks 
are great animals to explore questions about light sensing as eyes have evolved 
multiple times across, and within, taxonomic classes. We used molluscan genome 
assemblies from 80 species to predict protein sequences and examine gene family 
evolution using phylogenetic approaches. We found extensive opsin family 
expansion and contraction, particularly in bivalve xenopsins and gastropod 
Go-opsins, while other opsins, like retinochrome, rarely duplicate. Bivalve and 
gastropod lineages exhibit fluctuations in opsin repertoire, with cephalopods 
having the fewest number of opsins and loss of at least 2 major opsin types. 
Interestingly, opsin expansions are not limited to eyed species, and the highest 
opsin content was seen in eyeless bivalves. The dynamic nature of opsin 
evolution is quite contrary to the general lack of diversification in mollusk 
cryptochromes, though some taxa, including cephalopods and terrestrial 
gastropods, have reduced repertoires of both protein families. We also found 
complete loss of opsins and cryptochromes in multiple, but not all, deep-sea 
species. These results help set the stage for connecting genomic changes, 
including opsin family expansion and contraction, with differences in 
environmental, and biological features across Mollusca.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad263
PMCID: PMC10733189
PMID: 38039155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


124. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad261. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad261.

Genetic Modification of a Hox Locus Drives Mimetic Color Pattern Variation in a 
Highly Polymorphic Bumble Bee.

Yang W(1), Cui J(1), Chen Y(1), Wang C(1), Yin Y(1), Zhang W(2), Liu S(1), Sun 
C(3), Li H(1), Duan Y(1), Song F(1), Cai W(1), Hines HM(4), Tian L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology and MOA Key Lab of Pest Monitoring and Green 
Management, College of Plant Protection, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100193, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life 
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China.
(4)Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 
16802, USA.

Müllerian mimicry provides natural replicates ideal for exploring mechanisms 
underlying adaptive phenotypic divergence and convergence, yet the genetic 
mechanisms underlying mimetic variation remain largely unknown. The current 
study investigates the genetic basis of mimetic color pattern variation in a 
highly polymorphic bumble bee, Bombus breviceps (Hymenoptera, Apidae). In South 
Asia, this species and multiple comimetic species converge onto local Müllerian 
mimicry patterns by shifting the abdominal setal color from orange to black. 
Genetic crossing between the orange and black phenotypes suggested the color 
dimorphism being controlled by a single Mendelian locus, with the orange allele 
being dominant over black. Genome-wide association suggests that a locus at the 
intergenic region between 2 abdominal fate-determining Hox genes, abd-A and 
Abd-B, is associated with the color change. This locus is therefore in the same 
intergenic region but not the same exact locus as found to drive red black 
midabdominal variation in a distantly related bumble bee species, Bombus 
melanopygus. Gene expression analysis and RNA interferences suggest that 
differential expression of an intergenic long noncoding RNA between abd-A and 
Abd-B at the onset setal color differentiation may drive the orange black color 
variation by causing a homeotic shift late in development. Analysis of this same 
color locus in comimetic species reveals no sequence association with the same 
color shift, suggesting that mimetic convergence is achieved through distinct 
genetic routes. Our study establishes Hox regions as genomic hotspots for color 
pattern evolution in bumble bees and demonstrates how pleiotropic developmental 
loci can drive adaptive radiations in nature.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad261
PMCID: PMC10724181
PMID: 38039153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. All authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


125. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad259. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad259.

Subgenomic Stability of Progenitor Genomes During Repeated Allotetraploid 
Origins of the Same Grass Brachypodium hybridum.

Mu W(1)(2), Li K(1), Yang Y(1), Breiman A(3), Yang J(1), Wu Y(1), Zhu M(1), Wang 
S(2), Catalan P(4), Nevo E(5), Liu J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Herbage Innovation and Grassland Agro-Ecosystem, 
College of Ecology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Animal Disease Control and Prevention, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Department of Evolutionary and Environmental Biology, University of Tel-Aviv, 
Tel-Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(4)Escuela Politecnica Superior de Huesca, Universidad de Zaragoza, Huesca 
22071, Spain.
(5)Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa 3498838, Israel.

Both homeologous exchanges and homeologous expression bias are generally found 
in most allopolyploid species. Whether homeologous exchanges and homeologous 
expression bias differ between repeated allopolyploid speciation events from the 
same progenitor species remains unknown. Here, we detected a third independent 
and recent allotetraploid origin for the model grass Brachypodium hybridum. Our 
homeologous exchange with replacement analyses indicated the absence of 
significant homeologous exchanges in any of the three types of wild 
allotetraploids, supporting the integrity of their progenitor subgenomes and the 
immediate creation of the amphidiploids. Further homeologous expression bias 
tests did not uncover significant subgenomic dominance in different tissues and 
conditions of the allotetraploids. This suggests a balanced expression of 
homeologs under similar or dissimilar ecological conditions in their natural 
habitats. We observed that the density of transposons around genes was not 
associated with the initial establishment of subgenome dominance; rather, this 
feature is inherited from the progenitor genome. We found that drought response 
genes were highly induced in the two subgenomes, likely contributing to the 
local adaptation of this species to arid habitats in the third allotetraploid 
event. These findings provide evidence for the consistency of subgenomic 
stability of parental genomes across multiple allopolyploidization events that 
led to the same species at different periods. Our study emphasizes the 
importance of selecting closely related progenitor species genomes to accurately 
assess homeologous exchange with replacement in allopolyploids, thereby avoiding 
the detection of false homeologous exchanges when using less related progenitor 
species genomes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad259
PMCID: PMC10708906
PMID: 38000891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


126. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad258. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad258.

Historic Museum Samples Provide Evidence for a Recent Replacement of Wolbachia 
Types in European Drosophila melanogaster.

Strunov A(1), Kirchner S(2), Schindelar J(2), Kruckenhauser L(2)(3), Haring 
E(2)(3), Kapun M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)Natural History Museum Vienna, Central Research Laboratories, Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Department for Evolutionary Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Wolbachia is one of the most common bacterial endosymbionts, which is frequently 
found in numerous arthropods and nematode taxa. Wolbachia infections can have a 
strong influence on the evolutionary dynamics of their hosts since these 
bacteria are reproductive manipulators that affect the fitness and life history 
of their host species for their own benefit. Host-symbiont interactions with 
Wolbachia are perhaps best studied in the model organism Drosophila 
melanogaster, which is naturally infected with at least 5 different variants 
among which wMel and wMelCS are the most frequent ones. Comparisons of infection 
types between natural flies and long-term lab stocks have previously indicated 
that wMelCS represents the ancestral type, which was only very recently replaced 
by the nowadays dominant wMel in most natural populations. In this study, we 
took advantage of recently sequenced museum specimens of D. melanogaster that 
have been collected 90 to 200 yr ago in Northern Europe to test this hypothesis. 
Our comparison to contemporary Wolbachia samples provides compelling support for 
the replacement hypothesis. Our analyses show that sequencing data from historic 
museum specimens and their bycatch are an emerging and unprecedented resource to 
address fundamental questions about evolutionary dynamics in host-symbiont 
interactions. However, we also identified contamination with DNA from crickets 
that resulted in co-contamination with cricket-specific Wolbachia in several 
samples. These results underpin the need for rigorous quality assessments of 
museomic data sets to account for contamination as a source of error that may 
strongly influence biological interpretations if it remains undetected.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad258
PMCID: PMC10701101
PMID: 37995370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


127. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad248. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad248.

IPOP: An Integrative Plant Multi-omics Platform for Cross-species Comparison and 
Evolutionary Study.

Huang W(1), Hu X(2), Ren Y(1), Song M(1), Ma C(1)(3), Miao Z(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, Center of 
Bioinformatics, College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi 712100, China.
(2)College of Chemistry & Pharmacy, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 
712100, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetics Improvement of Maize in Arid Area of 
Northwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi 712100, China.

The advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies has led to the production 
of a significant amount of omics data in plants, which serves as valuable assets 
for conducting cross-species multi-omics comparative analysis. Nevertheless, the 
current dearth of comprehensive platforms providing evolutionary annotation 
information and multi-species multi-omics data impedes users from systematically 
and efficiently performing evolutionary and functional analysis on specific 
genes. In order to establish an advanced plant multi-omics platform that 
provides timely, accurate, and high-caliber omics information, we collected 7 
distinct types of omics data from 6 monocots, 6 dicots, and 1 moss, and 
reanalyzed these data using standardized pipelines. Additionally, we furnished 
homology information, duplication events, and phylostratigraphic stages of 13 
species to facilitate evolutionary examination. Furthermore, the integrative 
plant omics platform (IPOP) is bundled with a variety of online analysis tools 
that aid users in conducting evolutionary and functional analysis. Specifically, 
the Multi-omics Integration Analysis tool is available to consolidate 
information from diverse omics sources, while the Transcriptome-wide Association 
Analysis tool facilitates the linkage of functional analysis with phenotype. To 
illustrate the application of IPOP, we conducted a case study on the YTH domain 
gene family, wherein we observed shared functionalities within orthologous 
groups and discerned variations in evolutionary patterns across these groups. To 
summarize, the IPOP platform offers valuable evolutionary insights and 
multi-omics data to the plant sciences community, effectively addressing the 
need for cross-species comparison and evolutionary research platforms. All data 
and modules within IPOP are freely accessible for academic purposes 
(http://omicstudio.cloud:4012/ipod/).

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad248
PMCID: PMC10715199
PMID: 37995323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing financial interest.


128. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad256. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad256.

Genetic Load and Adaptive Potential of a Recovered Avian Species that Narrowly 
Avoided Extinction.

Femerling G(1)(2)(3), van Oosterhout C(4), Feng S(5)(6)(7), Bristol RM(8)(9), 
Zhang G(5)(6)(7), Groombridge J(9), P Gilbert MT(1)(10), Morales HE(1).

Author information:
(1)Section for Hologenomics, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 
Cuernavaca, México.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(4)School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(5)Center for Evolutionary & Organismal Biology, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(6)Liangzhu Laboratory, Zhejiang University Medical Center, Hangzhou, China.
(7)Innovation Center of Yangtze River Delta, Zhejiang University, Jiashan, 
China.
(8)Mahe, Seychelles.
(9)Division of Human and Social Sciences, Durrell Institute of Conservation and 
Ecology, School of Anthropology and Conservation, University of Kent, 
Canterbury, Kent, CT2 7NR, UK.
(10)University Museum, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway.

High genetic diversity is a good predictor of long-term population viability, 
yet some species persevere despite having low genetic diversity. Here we study 
the genomic erosion of the Seychelles paradise flycatcher (Terpsiphone corvina), 
a species that narrowly avoided extinction after having declined to 28 
individuals in the 1960s. The species recovered unassisted to over 250 
individuals in the 1990s and was downlisted from Critically Endangered to 
Vulnerable in the International Union for the Conservation of Nature Red List in 
2020. By comparing historical, prebottleneck (130+ years old) and modern 
genomes, we uncovered a 10-fold loss of genetic diversity. Highly deleterious 
mutations were partly purged during the bottleneck, but mildly deleterious 
mutations accumulated. The genome shows signs of historical inbreeding during 
the bottleneck in the 1960s, but low levels of recent inbreeding after 
demographic recovery. Computer simulations suggest that the species long-term 
small Ne reduced the masked genetic load and made the species more resilient to 
inbreeding and extinction. However, the reduction in genetic diversity due to 
the chronically small Ne and the severe bottleneck is likely to have reduced the 
species adaptive potential to face environmental change, which together with a 
higher load, compromises its long-term population viability. Thus, small 
ancestral Ne offers short-term bottleneck resilience but hampers long-term 
adaptability to environmental shifts. In light of rapid global rates of 
population decline, our work shows that species can continue to suffer the 
effect of their decline even after recovery, highlighting the importance of 
considering genomic erosion and computer modeling in conservation assessments.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad256
PMCID: PMC10701096
PMID: 37995319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


129. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad257. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad257.

Inference of Admixture Origins in Indigenous African Cattle.

Kim K(1)(2), Kim D(3), Hanotte O(4)(5)(6), Lee C(1), Kim H(2)(7)(8), Jeong C(3).

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Agricultural Biotechnology and Research Institute of 
Agriculture and Life Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)LiveGene, International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia.
(5)The Centre for Tropical Livestock Genetics and Health (CTLGH), The Roslin 
Institute, The University of Edinburgh, Midlothian, UK.
(6)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(7)Interdisciplinary Program in Bioinformatics, Seoul National University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(8)eGnome, Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Present-day African cattle retain a unique genetic profile composed of a mixture 
of the Bos taurus and Bos indicus populations introduced into the continent at 
different time periods. However, details of the admixture history and the exact 
origins of the source populations remain obscure. Here, we infer the source of 
admixture in the earliest domestic cattle in Africa, African taurine. We detect 
a significant contribution (up to ∼20%) from a basal taurine lineage, which 
might represent the now-extinct African aurochs. In addition, we show that the 
indicine ancestry of African cattle, although most closely related to so-far 
sampled North Indian indicine breeds, has a small amount of additional genetic 
affinity to Southeast Asian indicine breeds. Our findings support the hypothesis 
of aurochs introgression into African taurine and generate a novel hypothesis 
that the origin of indicine ancestry in Africa might be different indicine 
populations than the ones found in North India today.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad257
PMCID: PMC10701095
PMID: 37995300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. C.L. is a 
scientific advisory board member of Nabsys and Genome Insight.


130. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad253. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad253.

DegronMD: Leveraging Evolutionary and Structural Features for Deciphering 
Protein-Targeted Degradation, Mutations, and Drug Response to Degrons.

Xu H(1)(2), Hu R(2)(3)(4), Zhao Z(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.
(2)Center for Precision Health, School of Biomedical Informatics, The University 
of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Center for Advanced Parkinson Research, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Genomics and Bioinformatics Hub, Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)MD Anderson Cancer Center UTHealth Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(6)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, The University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Protein-targeted degradation is an emerging and promising therapeutic approach. 
The specificity of degradation and the maintenance of cellular homeostasis are 
determined by the interactions between E3 ubiquitin ligase and degradation 
signals, known as degrons. The human genome encodes over 600 E3 ligases; 
however, only a small number of targeted degron instances have been identified 
so far. In this study, we introduced DegronMD, an open knowledgebase designed 
for the investigation of degrons, their associated dysfunctional events, and 
drug responses. We revealed that degrons are evolutionarily conserved and tend 
to occur near the sites of protein translational modifications, particularly in 
the regions of disordered structure and higher solvent accessibility. Through 
pattern recognition and machine learning techniques, we constructed the degrome 
landscape across the human proteome, yielding over 18,000 new degrons for 
targeted protein degradation. Furthermore, dysfunction of degrons disrupts the 
degradation process and leads to the abnormal accumulation of proteins; this 
process is associated with various types of human cancers. Based on the 
estimated phenotypic changes induced by somatic mutations, we systematically 
quantified and assessed the impact of mutations on degron function in 
pan-cancers; these results helped to build a global mutational map on human 
degrome, including 89,318 actionable mutations that may induce the dysfunction 
of degrons and disrupt protein degradation pathways. Multiomics integrative 
analysis unveiled over 400 drug resistance events associated with the mutations 
in functional degrons. DegronMD, accessible at https://bioinfo.uth.edu/degronmd, 
is a useful resource to explore the biological mechanisms, infer protein 
degradation, and assist with drug discovery and design on degrons.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad253
PMCID: PMC10701100
PMID: 37992195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest. The authors declare no 
competing interests.


131. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad252. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad252.

Temporal Variation in Introgressed Segments' Length Statistics Computed from a 
Limited Number of Ancient Genomes Sheds Light on Past Admixture Pulses.

Di Santo LN(1), Quilodrán CS(1), Currat M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, University of Geneva, Geneva CH-1205.
(2)Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (IGE3), University of Geneva, 
Geneva CH-1205.

Hybridization is recognized as an important evolutionary force, but identifying 
and timing admixture events between divergent lineages remain a major aim of 
evolutionary biology. While this has traditionally been done using inferential 
tools on contemporary genomes, the latest advances in paleogenomics have 
provided a growing wealth of temporally distributed genomic data. Here, we used 
individual-based simulations to generate chromosome-level genomic data for a 
2-population system and described temporal neutral introgression patterns under 
a single- and 2-pulse admixture model. We computed 6 summary statistics aiming 
to inform the timing and number of admixture pulses between interbreeding 
entities: lengths of introgressed sequences and their variance within genomes, 
as well as genome-wide introgression proportions and related measures. The first 
2 statistics could confidently be used to infer interlineage hybridization 
history, peaking at the beginning and shortly after an admixture pulse. Temporal 
variation in introgression proportions and related statistics provided more 
limited insights, particularly when considering their application to ancient 
genomes still scant in number. Lastly, we computed these statistics on Homo 
sapiens paleogenomes and successfully inferred the hybridization pulse from 
Neanderthal that occurred approximately 40 to 60 kya. The scarce number of 
genomes dating from this period prevented more precise inferences, but the 
accumulation of paleogenomic data opens promising perspectives as our approach 
only requires a limited number of ancient genomes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad252
PMCID: PMC10715198
PMID: 37992125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


132. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad245. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad245.

The Scorpionfly (Panorpa cognata) Genome Highlights Conserved and Derived 
Features of the Peculiar Dipteran X Chromosome.

Lasne C(1), Elkrewi M(1), Toups MA(2), Layana L(1), Macon A(1), Vicoso B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Bournemouth University, Poole, 
UK.

Many insects carry an ancient X chromosome-the Drosophila Muller element F-that 
likely predates their origin. Interestingly, the X has undergone turnover in 
multiple fly species (Diptera) after being conserved for more than 450 My. The 
long evolutionary distance between Diptera and other sequenced insect clades 
makes it difficult to infer what could have contributed to this sudden increase 
in rate of turnover. Here, we produce the first genome and transcriptome of a 
long overlooked sister-order to Diptera: Mecoptera. We compare the scorpionfly 
Panorpa cognata X-chromosome gene content, expression, and structure to that of 
several dipteran species as well as more distantly related insect orders 
(Orthoptera and Blattodea). We find high conservation of gene content between 
the mecopteran X and the dipteran Muller F element, as well as several shared 
biological features, such as the presence of dosage compensation and a low 
amount of genetic diversity, consistent with a low recombination rate. However, 
the 2 homologous X chromosomes differ strikingly in their size and number of 
genes they carry. Our results therefore support a common ancestry of the 
mecopteran and ancestral dipteran X chromosomes, and suggest that Muller element 
F shrank in size and gene content after the split of Diptera and Mecoptera, 
which may have contributed to its turnover in dipteran insects.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad245
PMCID: PMC10715201
PMID: 37988296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Jan 3;41(1):msad254. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad254.

A Conserved Ribosomal Protein Has Entirely Dissimilar Structures in Different 
Organisms.

Schierholz L(1), Brown CR(2), Helena-Bueno K(2), Uversky VN(3), Hirt RP(2), 
Barandun J(1), Melnikov SV(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Laboratory for Molecular Infection Medicine 
Sweden, Umeå Centre for Microbial Research, Science for Life Laboratory, Umeå 
University, Umeå 901 87, Sweden.
(2)Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University School of Medicine, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(3)Department of Molecular Medicine and USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Research 
Institute, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 
33612, USA.

Ribosomes from different species can markedly differ in their composition by 
including dozens of ribosomal proteins that are unique to specific lineages but 
absent in others. However, it remains unknown how ribosomes acquire new proteins 
throughout evolution. Here, to help answer this question, we describe the 
evolution of the ribosomal protein msL1/msL2 that was recently found in 
ribosomes from the parasitic microorganism clade, microsporidia. We show that 
this protein has a conserved location in the ribosome but entirely dissimilar 
structures in different organisms: in each of the analyzed species, msL1/msL2 
exhibits an altered secondary structure, an inverted orientation of the 
N-termini and C-termini on the ribosomal binding surface, and a completely 
transformed 3D fold. We then show that this fold switching is likely caused by 
changes in the ribosomal msL1/msL2-binding site, specifically, by variations in 
rRNA. These observations allow us to infer an evolutionary scenario in which a 
small, positively charged, de novo-born unfolded protein was first captured by 
rRNA to become part of the ribosome and subsequently underwent complete fold 
switching to optimize its binding to its evolving ribosomal binding site. 
Overall, our work provides a striking example of how a protein can switch its 
fold in the context of a complex biological assembly, while retaining its 
specificity for its molecular partner. This finding will help us better 
understand the origin and evolution of new protein components of complex 
molecular assemblies-thereby enhancing our ability to engineer biological 
molecules, identify protein homologs, and peer into the history of life on 
Earth.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad254
PMCID: PMC10764239
PMID: 37987564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad255. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad255.

Extensive Phylogenomic Discordance and the Complex Evolutionary History of the 
Neotropical Cat Genus Leopardus.

Lescroart J(1)(2), Bonilla-Sánchez A(2)(3), Napolitano C(4)(5)(6)(7), 
Buitrago-Torres DL(2), Ramírez-Chaves HE(8)(9), Pulido-Santacruz P(10), Murphy 
WJ(11)(12), Svardal H(1)(13), Eizirik E(2)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)School of Health and Life Sciences, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio 
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(3)Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of Antioquia, Medellín, 
Colombia.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences and Biodiversity, University of Los Lagos, 
Osorno, Chile.
(5)Institute of Ecology and Biodiversity, Concepción, Chile.
(6)Cape Horn International Center, Puerto Williams, Chile.
(7)Andean Cat Alliance, Villa Carlos Paz, Argentina.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Caldas, Manizales, Colombia.
(9)Centro de Museos, Museo de Historia Natural, University of Caldas, Manizales, 
Colombia.
(10)Department of Biology, University of El Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia.
(11)Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(12)Interdisciplinary Program in Genetics & Genomics, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA.
(13)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(14)Instituto Pró-Carnívoros, Atibaia, Brazil.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):

Even in the genomics era, the phylogeny of Neotropical small felids comprised in 
the genus Leopardus remains contentious. We used whole-genome resequencing data 
to construct a time-calibrated consensus phylogeny of this group, quantify 
phylogenomic discordance, test for interspecies introgression, and assess 
patterns of genetic diversity and demographic history. We infer that the 
Leopardus radiation started in the Early Pliocene as an initial speciation 
burst, followed by another in its subgenus Oncifelis during the Early 
Pleistocene. Our findings challenge the long-held notion that ocelot (Leopardus 
pardalis) and margay (L. wiedii) are sister species and instead indicate that 
margay is most closely related to the enigmatic Andean cat (L. jacobita), whose 
whole-genome data are reported here for the first time. In addition, we found 
that the newly sampled Andean tiger cat (L. tigrinus pardinoides) population 
from Colombia associates closely with Central American tiger cats (L. tigrinus 
oncilla). Genealogical discordance was largely attributable to incomplete 
lineage sorting, yet was augmented by strong gene flow between ocelot and the 
ancestral branch of Oncifelis, as well as between Geoffroy's cat (L. geoffroyi) 
and southern tiger cat (L. guttulus). Contrasting demographic trajectories have 
led to disparate levels of current genomic diversity, with a nearly tenfold 
difference in heterozygosity between Andean cat and ocelot, spanning the entire 
range of variability found in extant felids. Our analyses improved our 
understanding of the speciation history and diversity patterns in this felid 
radiation, and highlight the benefits to phylogenomic inference of embracing the 
many heterogeneous signals scattered across the genome.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad255
PMCID: PMC10701098
PMID: 37987559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


135. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad251. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad251.

Phosphate Limitation Responses in Marine Green Algae Are Linked to Reprogramming 
of the tRNA Epitranscriptome and Codon Usage Bias.

Hehenberger E(1)(2), Guo J(3), Wilken S(3), Hoadley K(1), Sudek L(3), Poirier 
C(1), Dannebaum R(4), Susko E(5), Worden AZ(1)(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Ocean EcoSystems Biology Unit, RD3, GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean 
Research, 24148 Kiel, DE.
(2)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, 370 05 
České Budějovice, CZ.
(3)Ocean Sciences Department, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, 
CA 95064, USA.
(4)Joint Genome Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 
94720, USA.
(5)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia B3H 4R2, CA.
(6)Josephine Bay Paul Center for Comparative Molecular Biology and Evolution, 
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA.
(7)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, 24306 Plön, DE.

Marine algae are central to global carbon fixation, and their productivity is 
dictated largely by resource availability. Reduced nutrient availability is 
predicted for vast oceanic regions as an outcome of climate change; however, 
there is much to learn regarding response mechanisms of the tiny picoplankton 
that thrive in these environments, especially eukaryotic phytoplankton. Here, we 
investigate responses of the picoeukaryote Micromonas commoda, a green alga 
found throughout subtropical and tropical oceans. Under shifting phosphate 
availability scenarios, transcriptomic analyses revealed altered expression of 
transfer RNA modification enzymes and biased codon usage of transcripts more 
abundant during phosphate-limiting versus phosphate-replete conditions, 
consistent with the role of transfer RNA modifications in regulating codon 
recognition. To associate the observed shift in the expression of the transfer 
RNA modification enzyme complement with the transfer RNAs encoded by M. commoda, 
we also determined the transfer RNA repertoire of this alga revealing potential 
targets of the modification enzymes. Codon usage bias was particularly 
pronounced in transcripts encoding proteins with direct roles in managing 
phosphate limitation and photosystem-associated proteins that have 
ill-characterized putative functions in "light stress." The observed codon usage 
bias corresponds to a proposed stress response mechanism in which the interplay 
between stress-induced changes in transfer RNA modifications and skewed codon 
usage in certain essential response genes drives preferential translation of the 
encoded proteins. Collectively, we expose a potential underlying mechanism for 
achieving growth under enhanced nutrient limitation that extends beyond the 
catalog of up- or downregulated protein-encoding genes to the cell biological 
controls that underpin acclimation to changing environmental conditions.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad251
PMCID: PMC10735309
PMID: 37987557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad247. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad247.

Complex Evolutionary History With Extensive Ancestral Gene Flow in an African 
Primate Radiation.

Jensen A(1), Swift F(2), de Vries D(3), Beck RMD(3), Kuderna LFK(4), Knauf S(5), 
Chuma IS(6), Keyyu JD(7), Kitchener AC(8)(9), Farh K(4), Rogers J(10), 
Marques-Bonet T(11)(12)(13)(14)(15), Detwiler KM(16), Roos C(17), Guschanski 
K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Animal Ecology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala SE-75236, Sweden.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)School of Science, Engineering & Environment, University of Salford, Salford 
M5 4WT, UK.
(4)Illumina Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Illumina Inc., Foster City, CA 
94404, USA.
(5)Institute of International Animal Health/One Health, 
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, 
Greifswald - Insel Riems 17493, Germany.
(6)Tanzania National Parks, Arusha, Tanzania.
(7)Tanzania Wildlife Research Institute (TAWIRI), Arusha, Tanzania.
(8)Department of Natural Sciences, National Museums Scotland, Edinburgh EH1 1JF, 
UK.
(9)School of Geosciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XP, UK.
(10)Human Genome Sequencing Center and Department of Molecular and Human 
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(11)Institute of Evolutionary Biology (UPF-CSIC), PRBB, Barcelona 08003, Spain.
(12)Institut Català de Paleontologia Miquel Crusafont, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Catalan Institution of Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(14)CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona 08028, Spain.
(15)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA) and Universitat 
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 08010, Spain.
(16)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, 
FL, USA.
(17)Gene Bank of Primates and Primate Genetics Laboratory, German Primate 
Center, Leibniz Institute for Primate Research, Göttingen 37077, Germany.

Understanding the drivers of speciation is fundamental in evolutionary biology, 
and recent studies highlight hybridization as an important evolutionary force. 
Using whole-genome sequencing data from 22 species of guenons (tribe 
Cercopithecini), one of the world's largest primate radiations, we show that 
rampant gene flow characterizes their evolutionary history and identify ancient 
hybridization across deeply divergent lineages that differ in ecology, 
morphology, and karyotypes. Some hybridization events resulted in mitochondrial 
introgression between distant lineages, likely facilitated by cointrogression of 
coadapted nuclear variants. Although the genomic landscapes of introgression 
were largely lineage specific, we found that genes with immune functions were 
overrepresented in introgressing regions, in line with adaptive introgression, 
whereas genes involved in pigmentation and morphology may contribute to 
reproductive isolation. In line with reports from other systems that 
hybridization might facilitate diversification, we find that some of the most 
species-rich guenon clades are of admixed origin. This study provides important 
insights into the prevalence, role, and outcomes of ancestral hybridization in a 
large mammalian radiation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad247
PMCID: PMC10691879
PMID: 37987553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. Employees of 
Illumina, Inc. are indicated in the list of author affiliations. All other 
authors declare no conflict of interest.


137. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad250. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad250.

Unraveling the Unusual Subgenomic Organization in the Neopolyploid Free-Living 
Flatworm Macrostomum lignano.

Zadesenets KS(1), Ershov NI(1), Bondar NP(1)(2), Rubtsov NB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Cell Biology and Bionformatics, The Federal 
Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk 630090, 
Russia.
(2)Department of Natural Sciences, Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk 
630090, Russia.

Whole genome duplication (WGD) is an evolutionary event resulting in a 
redundancy of genetic material. Different mechanisms of WGD, allo- or 
autopolyploidization, lead to distinct evolutionary trajectories of newly formed 
polyploids. Genome studies on such species are important for understanding the 
early stages of genome evolution. However, assembling neopolyploid is a 
challenging task due to the presence of 2 homologous (or homeologous) chromosome 
sets and therefore the existence of the extended paralogous regions in its 
genome. Post-WGD evolution of polyploids includes cytogenetic diploidization 
leading to the formation of species, whose polyploid origin might be hidden by 
disomic inheritance. Earlier we uncovered the hidden polyploid origin of the 
free-living flatworms of the genus Macrostomum (Macrostomum lignano, M. 
janickei, and M. mirumnovem). Cytogenetic diploidization in these species is 
accompanied by intensive chromosomal rearrangements including chromosomes 
fusions. In this study, we unravel the M. lignano genome organization through 
generation and sequencing of 2 sublines of the commonly used inbred line of M. 
lignano (called DV1) differing only in a copy number of the largest chromosome 
(MLI1). Using nontrivial assembly free comparative analysis of their genomes, we 
deciphered DNA sequences belonging to MLI1 and validated them by sequencing the 
pool of microdissected MLI1. Here we presented the uncommon mechanism of genome 
rediplodization of M. lignano, which consists of (i) presence of 3 subgenomes, 
which emerged via formation of large fused chromosomes and its variants, and 
(ii) sustaining their heterozygosity through inter- and intrachromosomal 
rearrangements.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad250
PMCID: PMC10733133
PMID: 37979163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


138. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad246. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad246.

Parallel Nonfunctionalization of CK1δ/ε Kinase Ohnologs Following a Whole-Genome 
Duplication Event.

Evans-Yamamoto D(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Dubé AK(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Saha 
G(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(8), Plante S(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Bradley D(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), 
Gagnon-Arsenault I(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Landry CR(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes (IBIS), Université Laval, 
Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada.
(2)Département de Biochimie, de Microbiologie et de Bio-informatique, Faculté 
des Sciences et de Génie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada.
(3)Département de Biologie, Faculté des Sciences et de Génie, Université Laval, 
Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada.
(4)PROTEO, Le regroupement québécois de recherche sur la fonction, l'ingénierie 
et les applications des protéines, Université Laval, Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, 
Canada.
(5)Centre de Recherche sur les Données Massives (CRDM), Université Laval, 
Québec, QC, G1V 0A6, Canada.
(6)Systems Biology Program, Graduate School of Media and Governance, Keio 
University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, 252-0882, Japan.
(7)Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, 
252-0882, Japan.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, 
Pilani K K Birla Goa Campus, South Goa, India.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Oct 02;:

Whole-genome duplication (WGD) followed by speciation allows us to examine the 
parallel evolution of ohnolog pairs. In the yeast family Saccharomycetaceae, 
HRR25 is a rare case of repeated ohnolog maintenance. This gene has reverted to 
a single copy in Saccharomyces cerevisiae where it is now essential, but has 
been maintained as pairs in at least 7 species post-WGD. In S. cerevisiae, HRR25 
encodes the casein kinase 1δ/ε and plays a role in a variety of functions 
through its kinase activity and protein-protein interactions (PPIs). We 
hypothesized that the maintenance of duplicated HRR25 ohnologs could be a result 
of repeated subfunctionalization. We tested this hypothesis through a functional 
complementation assay in S. cerevisiae, testing all pairwise combinations of 25 
orthologs (including 7 ohnolog pairs). Contrary to our expectations, we observed 
no cases of pair-dependent complementation, which would have supported the 
subfunctionalization hypothesis. Instead, most post-WGD species have one ohnolog 
that failed to complement, suggesting their nonfunctionalization or 
neofunctionalization. The ohnologs incapable of complementation have undergone 
more rapid protein evolution, lost most PPIs that were observed for their 
functional counterparts and singletons from post-WGD and non-WGD species, and 
have nonconserved cellular localization, consistent with their ongoing loss of 
function. The analysis in Naumovozyma castellii shows that the noncomplementing 
ohnolog is expressed at a lower level and has become nonessential. Taken 
together, our results indicate that HRR25 orthologs are undergoing gradual 
nonfunctionalization.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad246
PMCID: PMC10699747
PMID: 37979156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad244. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad244.

Pithoviruses Are Invaded by Repeats That Contribute to Their Evolution and 
Divergence from Cedratviruses.

Rigou S(1), Schmitt A(1), Alempic JM(1), Lartigue A(1), Vendloczki P(1), Abergel 
C(1), Claverie JM(1), Legendre M(1).

Author information:
(1)Information Génomique & Structurale, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7256 (Institut 
de Microbiologie de la Méditerranée, FR3479), IM2B, IOM, Aix-Marseille 
University, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Marseille 13288 Cedex 
9, France.

Pithoviridae are amoeba-infecting giant viruses possessing the largest viral 
particles known so far. Since the discovery of Pithovirus sibericum, recovered 
from a 30,000-yr-old permafrost sample, other pithoviruses, and related 
cedratviruses, were isolated from various terrestrial and aquatic samples. Here, 
we report the isolation and genome sequencing of 2 Pithoviridae from soil 
samples, in addition to 3 other recent isolates. Using the 12 available genome 
sequences, we conducted a thorough comparative genomic study of the Pithoviridae 
family to decipher the organization and evolution of their genomes. Our study 
reveals a nonuniform genome organization in 2 main regions: 1 concentrating core 
genes and another gene duplications. We also found that Pithoviridae genomes are 
more conservative than other families of giant viruses, with a low and stable 
proportion (5% to 7%) of genes originating from horizontal transfers. Genome 
size variation within the family is mainly due to variations in gene duplication 
rates (from 14% to 28%) and massive invasion by inverted repeats. While these 
repeated elements are absent from cedratviruses, repeat-rich regions cover as 
much as a quarter of the pithoviruses genomes. These regions, identified using a 
dedicated pipeline, are hotspots of mutations, gene capture events, and genomic 
rearrangements that contribute to their evolution.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad244
PMCID: PMC10664404
PMID: 37950899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad243. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad243.

Redefining the Evolutionary History of the Rock Dove, Columba livia, Using Whole 
Genome Sequences.

Hernández-Alonso G(1)(2), Ramos-Madrigal J(1)(2), van Grouw H(3), Ciucani MM(1), 
Cavill EL(1)(2), Sinding MS(4), Gopalakrishnan S(1)(2)(5), Pacheco G(1), Gilbert 
MTP(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Section for Hologenomics, The Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Center for Evolutionary Hologenomics, The Globe Institute, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Bird Group, Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, Tring, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Bioinformatics, Department of Health Technology, Technical University of 
Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(6)University Museum, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, 
Norway.

The domestic pigeon's exceptional phenotypic diversity was key in developing 
Darwin's Theory of Evolution and establishing the concept of artificial 
selection. However, unlike its domestic counterpart, its wild progenitor, the 
rock dove Columba livia has received considerably less attention. Therefore, 
questions regarding its domestication, evolution, taxonomy, and conservation 
status remain unresolved. We generated whole-genome sequencing data from 65 
historical rock doves that represent all currently recognized subspecies and 
span the species' original geographic distribution. Our dataset includes 3 
specimens from Darwin's collection, and the type specimens of 5 different taxa. 
We characterized their population structure, genomic diversity, and gene-flow 
patterns. Our results show the West African subspecies C. l. gymnocyclus is 
basal to rock doves and domestic pigeons, and suggests gene-flow between the 
rock dove's sister species C. rupestris, and the ancestor of rock doves after 
its split from West African populations. These genomes allowed us to propose a 
model for the evolution of the rock dove in light of the refugia theory. We 
propose that rock dove genetic diversity and introgression patterns derive from 
a history of allopatric cycles and dispersion waves during the Quaternary 
glacial and interglacial periods. To explore the rock dove domestication 
history, we combined our new dataset with available genomes from domestic 
pigeons. Our results point to at least 1 domestication event in the Levant that 
gave rise to all domestic breeds analysed in this study. Finally, we propose a 
species-level taxonomic arrangement to reflect the evolutionary history of the 
West African rock dove populations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad243
PMCID: PMC10667084
PMID: 37950889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad242. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad242.

Shrinkage-based Random Local Clocks with Scalable Inference.

Fisher AA(1), Ji X(2), Nishimura A(3), Baele G(4), Lemey P(4), Suchard 
MA(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistical Science, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, School of Science & Engineering, Tulane 
University, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Computational Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public 
Health, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Molecular clock models undergird modern methods of divergence-time estimation. 
Local clock models propose that the rate of molecular evolution is constant 
within phylogenetic subtrees. Current local clock inference procedures exhibit 
one or more weaknesses, namely they achieve limited scalability to trees with 
large numbers of taxa, impose model misspecification, or require a priori 
knowledge of the existence and location of clocks. To overcome these challenges, 
we present an autocorrelated, Bayesian model of heritable clock rate evolution 
that leverages heavy-tailed priors with mean zero to shrink increments of change 
between branch-specific clocks. We further develop an efficient Hamiltonian 
Monte Carlo sampler that exploits closed form gradient computations to scale our 
model to large trees. Inference under our shrinkage clock exhibits a speed-up 
compared to the popular random local clock when estimating branch-specific clock 
rates on a variety of simulated datasets. This speed-up increases with the size 
of the problem. We further show our shrinkage clock recovers known local clocks 
within a rodent and mammalian phylogeny. Finally, in a problem that once 
appeared computationally impractical, we investigate the heritable clock 
structure of various surface glycoproteins of influenza A virus in the absence 
of prior knowledge about clock placement. We implement our shrinkage clock and 
make it publicly available in the BEAST software package.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad242
PMCID: PMC10665039
PMID: 37950885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad235. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad235.

Building Phylogenetic Trees From Genome Sequences With kSNP4.

Hall BG(1), Nisbet J(1).

Author information:
(1)Bellingham Research Institute, Portland, OR, USA.

Performing phylogenetic analysis with genome sequences maximizes the information 
used to estimate phylogenies and the resolution of closely related taxa. The use 
of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) permits estimating trees without 
genome alignments and permits the use of data sets of hundreds of microbial 
genomes. kSNP4 is a program that identifies SNPs without using a reference 
genome, estimates parsimony, maximum likelihood, and neighbor-joining trees, and 
is able to annotate the discovered SNPs. kSNP4 is a command-line program that 
does not require any additional programs or dependencies to install or use. 
kSNP4 does not require any programming experience or bioinformatics experience 
to install and use. It is suitable for use by students through senior 
investigators. It includes a detailed user guide that explains all of the many 
features of kSNP4. In this study, we provide a detailed step-by-step protocol 
for downloading, installing, and using kSNP4 to build phylogenetic trees from 
genome sequences.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad235
PMCID: PMC10640685
PMID: 37948764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad239. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad239.

Evolution of the Spider Homeobox Gene Repertoire by Tandem and Whole Genome 
Duplication.

Aase-Remedios ME(1), Janssen R(2), Leite DJ(1), Sumner-Rooney L(3), McGregor 
AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Earth Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 752 36, Sweden.
(3)Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz-Institut für Evolutions- und 
Biodiversitätsforschung, Berlin, 10115, Germany.

Gene duplication generates new genetic material that can contribute to the 
evolution of gene regulatory networks and phenotypes. Duplicated genes can 
undergo subfunctionalization to partition ancestral functions and/or 
neofunctionalization to assume a new function. We previously found there had 
been a whole genome duplication (WGD) in an ancestor of arachnopulmonates, the 
lineage including spiders and scorpions but excluding other arachnids like 
mites, ticks, and harvestmen. This WGD was evidenced by many duplicated homeobox 
genes, including two Hox clusters, in spiders. However, it was unclear which 
homeobox paralogues originated by WGD versus smaller-scale events such as tandem 
duplications. Understanding this is a key to determining the contribution of the 
WGD to arachnopulmonate genome evolution. Here we characterized the distribution 
of duplicated homeobox genes across eight chromosome-level spider genomes. We 
found that most duplicated homeobox genes in spiders are consistent with an 
origin by WGD. We also found two copies of conserved homeobox gene clusters, 
including the Hox, NK, HRO, Irx, and SINE clusters, in all eight species. 
Consistently, we observed one copy of each cluster was degenerated in terms of 
gene content and organization while the other remained more intact. Focussing on 
the NK cluster, we found evidence for regulatory subfunctionalization between 
the duplicated NK genes in the spider Parasteatoda tepidariorum compared to 
their single-copy orthologues in the harvestman Phalangium opilio. Our study 
provides new insights into the relative contributions of multiple modes of 
duplication to the homeobox gene repertoire during the evolution of spiders and 
the function of NK genes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad239
PMCID: PMC10726417
PMID: 37935059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad240. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad240.

Mitonuclear Sex Determination? Empirical Evidence from Bivalves.

Smith CH(1), Mejia-Trujillo R(1), Breton S(2), Pinto BJ(3)(4)(5), Kirkpatrick 
M(1), Havird JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(4)Center for Evolution and Medicine, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(5)Department of Zoology, Milwaukee Public Museum, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jul 07;:

Genetic elements encoded in nuclear DNA determine the sex of an individual in 
many animals. In certain bivalve lineages that possess doubly uniparental 
inheritance (DUI), mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has been hypothesized to contribute 
to sex determination. In these cases, females transmit a female mtDNA to all 
offspring, while male mtDNA (M mtDNA) is transmitted only from fathers to sons. 
Because M mtDNA is inherited in the same way as Y chromosomes, it has been 
hypothesized that mtDNA may be responsible for sex determination. However, the 
role of mitochondrial and nuclear genes in sex determination has yet to be 
validated in DUI bivalves. In this study, we used DNA, RNA, and mitochondrial 
short noncoding RNA (sncRNA) sequencing to explore the role of mitochondrial and 
nuclear elements in the sexual development pathway of the freshwater mussel 
Potamilus streckersoni (Bivalvia: Unionida). We found that the M mtDNA sheds a 
sncRNA partially within a male-specific mitochondrial gene that targets a 
pathway hypothesized to be involved in female development and mitophagy. RNA-seq 
confirmed the gene target was significantly upregulated in females, supporting a 
direct role of mitochondrial sncRNAs in gene silencing. These findings support 
the hypothesis that M mtDNA inhibits female development. Genome-wide patterns of 
genetic differentiation and heterozygosity did not support a nuclear 
sex-determining region, although we cannot reject that nuclear factors are 
involved with sex determination. Our results provide further evidence that 
mitochondrial loci contribute to diverse, nonrespiratory functions and 
additional insights into an unorthodox sex-determining system.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad240
PMCID: PMC10653589
PMID: 37935058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad241. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad241.

Opsin Gene Duplication in Lepidoptera: Retrotransposition, Sex Linkage, and Gene 
Expression.

Mulhair PO(1), Crowley L(1), Boyes DH(2), Lewis OT(1), Holland PWH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3SZ, UK.
(2)UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, Wallingford OX10 8BB, UK.

Color vision in insects is determined by signaling cascades, central to which 
are opsin proteins, resulting in sensitivity to light at different wavelengths. 
In certain insect groups, lineage-specific evolution of opsin genes, in terms of 
copy number, shifts in expression patterns, and functional amino acid 
substitutions, has resulted in changes in color vision with subsequent 
behavioral and niche adaptations. Lepidoptera are a fascinating model to address 
whether evolutionary change in opsin content and sequence evolution are 
associated with changes in vision phenotype. Until recently, the lack of 
high-quality genome data representing broad sampling across the lepidopteran 
phylogeny has greatly limited our ability to accurately address this question. 
Here, we annotate opsin genes in 219 lepidopteran genomes representing 33 
families, reconstruct their evolutionary history, and analyze shifts in 
selective pressures and expression between genes and species. We discover 44 
duplication events in opsin genes across ∼300 million years of lepidopteran 
evolution. While many duplication events are species or family specific, we find 
retention of an ancient long-wavelength-sensitive (LW) opsin duplication derived 
by retrotransposition within the speciose superfamily Noctuoidea (in the 
families Nolidae, Erebidae, and Noctuidae). This conserved LW retrogene shows 
life stage-specific expression suggesting visual sensitivities or other sensory 
functions specific to the early larval stage. This study provides a 
comprehensive order-wide view of opsin evolution across Lepidoptera, showcasing 
high rates of opsin duplications and changes in expression patterns.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad241
PMCID: PMC10642689
PMID: 37935057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


146. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad238. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad238.

Deleterious and Adaptive Mutations in Plant Germplasm Conserved Ex Situ.

Fu YB(1), Peterson GW(1), Horbach C(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant Gene Resources of Canada, Saskatoon Research and Development Centre, 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Saskatoon, SK S7N 0X2, Canada.

Conserving more than 7 million plant germplasm accessions in 1,750 genebanks 
worldwide raises the hope of securing the food supply for humanity for future 
generations. However, there is a genetic cost for such long-term germplasm 
conservation, which has been largely unaccounted for before. We investigated the 
extent and variation of deleterious and adaptive mutations in 490 individual 
plants representing barley, wheat, oat, soybean, maize, rapa, and sunflower 
collections in a seed genebank using RNA-Seq technology. These collections were 
found to have a range of deleterious mutations detected from 125 (maize) to 
83,695 (oat) with a mean of 13,537 and of the averaged sample-wise mutation 
burden per deleterious locus from 0.069 to 0.357 with a mean of 0.200. Soybean 
and sunflower collections showed that accessions acquired earlier had increased 
mutation burdens. The germplasm with more years of storage in several 
collections carried more deleterious and fewer adaptive mutations. The samples 
with more cycles of germplasm regeneration revealed fewer deleterious and more 
adaptive mutations. These findings are significant for understanding mutational 
dynamics and genetic cost in conserved germplasm and have implications for 
long-term germplasm management and conservation.

Crown copyright © His Majesty the King in Right of Canada, 2023. Published by 
Oxford University Press on behalf of Society for Molecular Biology and 
Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad238
PMCID: PMC10724023
PMID: 37931158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


147. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad237. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad237.

Evolutionary "Crowdsourcing": Alignment of Fitness Landscapes Allows for 
Cross-species Adaptation of a Horizontally Transferred Gene.

Kosterlitz O(1)(2), Grassi N(1), Werner B(1), McGee RS(2)(3), Top EM(2)(4), Kerr 
B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(2)BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action, East Lansing, MI 48824, 
USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience, Washington University, St.Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences and Institute for Interdisciplinary Data 
Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID 83844, USA.

Genes that undergo horizontal gene transfer (HGT) evolve in different genomic 
backgrounds. Despite the ubiquity of cross-species HGT, the effects of switching 
hosts on gene evolution remains understudied. Here, we present a framework to 
examine the evolutionary consequences of host-switching and apply this framework 
to an antibiotic resistance gene commonly found on conjugative plasmids. 
Specifically, we determined the adaptive landscape of this gene for a small set 
of mutationally connected genotypes in 3 enteric species. We uncovered that the 
landscape topographies were largely aligned with minimal host-dependent 
mutational effects. By simulating gene evolution over the experimentally gauged 
landscapes, we found that the adaptive evolution of the mobile gene in one 
species translated to adaptation in another. By simulating gene evolution over 
artificial landscapes, we found that sufficient alignment between landscapes 
ensures such "adaptive equivalency" across species. Thus, given adequate 
landscape alignment within a bacterial community, vehicles of HGT such as 
plasmids may enable a distributed form of genetic evolution across community 
members, where species can "crowdsource" adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad237
PMCID: PMC10657783
PMID: 37931146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad231. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad231.

Natural Selection Signatures in the Hondo and Ryukyu Japanese Subpopulations.

Liu X(1)(2), Matsunami M(3), Horikoshi M(4), Ito S(1), Ishikawa Y(1), Suzuki 
K(5), Momozawa Y(5), Niida S(6), Kimura R(7), Ozaki K(8), Maeda S(3)(9), Imamura 
M(3)(9), Terao C(1)(2)(10).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Statistical and Translational Genetics, RIKEN Center for 
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Clinical Research Center, Shizuoka General Hospital, Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Advanced Genomic and Laboratory Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-Cho, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Genomics of Diabetes and Metabolism, RIKEN Center for 
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(5)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical 
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(6)Core Facility Administration, Research Institute, National Center for 
Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu, Japan.
(7)Department of Human Biology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-Cho, Japan.
(8)Medical Genome Center, Research Institute, National Center for Geriatrics and 
Gerontology, Obu, Japan.
(9)Division of Clinical Laboratory and Blood Transfusion, University of the 
Ryukyus Hospital, Okinawa, Japan.
(10)The Department of Applied Genetics, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan.

Natural selection signatures across Japanese subpopulations are under-explored. 
Here we conducted genome-wide selection scans with 622,926 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms for 20,366 Japanese individuals, who were recruited from the 
main-islands of Japanese Archipelago (Hondo) and the Ryukyu Archipelago 
(Ryukyu), representing two major Japanese subpopulations. The integrated 
haplotype score (iHS) analysis identified several signals in one or both 
subpopulations. We found a novel candidate locus at IKZF2, especially in Ryukyu. 
Significant signals were observed in the major histocompatibility complex region 
in both subpopulations. The lead variants differed and demonstrated substantial 
allele frequency differences between Hondo and Ryukyu. The lead variant in Hondo 
tags HLA-A*33:03-C*14:03-B*44:03-DRB1*13:02-DQB1*06:04-DPB1*04:01, a haplotype 
specific to Japanese and Korean. While in Ryukyu, the lead variant tags 
DRB1*15:01-DQB1*06:02, which had been recognized as a genetic risk factor for 
narcolepsy. In contrast, it is reported to confer protective effects against 
type 1 diabetes and human T lymphotropic virus type 1-associated 
myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis. The FastSMC analysis identified 8 loci 
potentially affected by selection within the past 20-150 generations, including 
2 novel candidate loci. The analysis also showed differences in selection 
patterns of ALDH2 between Hondo and Ryukyu, a gene recognized to be specifically 
targeted by selection in East Asian. In summary, our study provided insights 
into the selection signatures within the Japanese and nominated potential 
sources of selection pressure.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad231
PMCID: PMC10615566
PMID: 37903429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad236. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad236.

Cold-Driven Hemoglobin Evolution in Antarctic Notothenioid Fishes Prior to 
Hemoglobin Gene Loss in White-Blooded Icefishes.

Desvignes T(1), Bista I(2)(3)(4), Herrera K(1), Landes A(1), Postlethwait JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
(2)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Tree of Life, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton CB10 
1SA, United Kingdom.
(3)LOEWE Centre for Translational Biodiversity Genomics, Frankfurt 60325, 
Germany.
(4)Senckenberg Research Institute, Frankfurt 60325, Germany.

Expression of multiple hemoglobin isoforms with differing physiochemical 
properties likely helps species adapt to different environmental and 
physiological conditions. Antarctic notothenioid fishes inhabit the icy Southern 
Ocean and display fewer hemoglobin isoforms, each with less affinity for oxygen 
than temperate relatives. Reduced hemoglobin multiplicity was proposed to result 
from relaxed selective pressure in the cold, thermally stable, and highly 
oxygenated Antarctic waters. These conditions also permitted the survival and 
diversification of white-blooded icefishes, the only vertebrates living without 
hemoglobin. To understand hemoglobin evolution during adaptation to freezing 
water, we analyzed hemoglobin genes from 36 notothenioid genome assemblies. 
Results showed that adaptation to frigid conditions shaped hemoglobin gene 
evolution by episodic diversifying selection concomitant with cold adaptation 
and by pervasive evolution in Antarctic notothenioids compared to temperate 
relatives, likely a continuing adaptation to Antarctic conditions. Analysis of 
hemoglobin gene expression in adult hematopoietic organs in various temperate 
and Antarctic species further revealed a switch in hemoglobin gene expression 
underlying hemoglobin multiplicity reduction in Antarctic fish, leading to a 
single hemoglobin isoform in adult plunderfishes and dragonfishes, the sister 
groups to icefishes. The predicted high hemoglobin multiplicity in Antarctic 
fish embryos based on transcriptomic data, however, raises questions about the 
molecular bases and physiological implications of diverse hemoglobin isoforms in 
embryos compared to adults. This analysis supports the hypothesis that the last 
common icefish ancestor was vulnerable to detrimental mutations affecting the 
single ancestral expressed alpha- and beta-globin gene pair, potentially 
predisposing their subsequent loss.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad236
PMCID: PMC10651078
PMID: 37879119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


150. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad234. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad234.

PhylteR: Efficient Identification of Outlier Sequences in Phylogenomic Datasets.

Comte A(1)(2), Tricou T(3), Tannier E(3)(4), Joseph J(3), Siberchicot A(3), 
Penel S(3), Allio R(5), Delsuc F(6), Dray S(3), de Vienne DM(3).

Author information:
(1)French Institute of Bioinformatics (IFB)-South Green Bioinformatics Platform, 
Bioversity, CIRAD, INRAE, IRD, Montpellier, France.
(2)IRD, CIRAD, INRAE, Institut Agro, PHIM Plant Health Institute, Montpellier 
University, Montpellier, France.
(3)Université de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, UMR CNRS 5558 Laboratoire de Biométrie 
et Biologie Évolutive, Villeurbanne, France.
(4)Centre de Recherches Inria de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France.
(5)CBGP, INRAE, CIRAD, IRD, Montpellier SupAgro, Univ. Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.
(6)ISEM, Univ. Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, Montpellier, France.

In phylogenomics, incongruences between gene trees, resulting from both 
artifactual and biological reasons, can decrease the signal-to-noise ratio and 
complicate species tree inference. The amount of data handled today in classical 
phylogenomic analyses precludes manual error detection and removal. However, a 
simple and efficient way to automate the identification of outliers from a 
collection of gene trees is still missing. Here, we present PhylteR, a method 
that allows rapid and accurate detection of outlier sequences in phylogenomic 
datasets, i.e. species from individual gene trees that do not follow the general 
trend. PhylteR relies on DISTATIS, an extension of multidimensional scaling to 3 
dimensions to compare multiple distance matrices at once. In PhylteR, these 
distance matrices extracted from individual gene phylogenies represent 
evolutionary distances between species according to each gene. On simulated 
datasets, we show that PhylteR identifies outliers with more sensitivity and 
precision than a comparable existing method. We also show that PhylteR is not 
sensitive to ILS-induced incongruences, which is a desirable feature. On a 
biological dataset of 14,463 genes for 53 species previously assembled for 
Carnivora phylogenomics, we show (i) that PhylteR identifies as outliers 
sequences that can be considered as such by other means, and (ii) that the 
removal of these sequences improves the concordance between the gene trees and 
the species tree. Thanks to the generation of numerous graphical outputs, 
PhylteR also allows for the rapid and easy visual characterization of the 
dataset at hand, thus aiding in the precise identification of errors. PhylteR is 
distributed as an R package on CRAN and as containerized versions (docker and 
singularity).

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad234
PMCID: PMC10655845
PMID: 37879113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


151. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad218. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad218.

Genus-Wide Transcriptional Landscapes Reveal Correlated Gene Networks Underlying 
Microevolutionary Divergence in Diatoms.

Walworth NG(1)(2), Espinoza JL(2), Argyle PA(3), Hinners J(4)(5), Levine NM(1), 
Doblin MA(3), Dupont CL(2), Collins S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA 90089-0371, USA.
(2)J.Craig Venter Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)Climate Change Cluster, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales 2007, Australia.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3FL, 
UK.
(5)Helmholtz-Zentrum Hereon, 21502 Geesthacht, Germany.

Marine microbes like diatoms make up the base of marine food webs and drive 
global nutrient cycles. Despite their key roles in ecology, biogeochemistry, and 
biotechnology, we have limited empirical data on how forces other than 
adaptation may drive diatom diversification, especially in the absence of 
environmental change. One key feature of diatom populations is frequent extreme 
reductions in population size, which can occur both in situ and ex situ as part 
of bloom-and-bust growth dynamics. This can drive divergence between closely 
related lineages, even in the absence of environmental differences. Here, we 
combine experimental evolution and transcriptome landscapes (t-scapes) to reveal 
repeated evolutionary divergence within several species of diatoms in a constant 
environment. We show that most of the transcriptional divergence can be captured 
on a reduced set of axes, and that repeatable evolution can occur along a single 
major axis of variation defined by core ortholog expression comprising common 
metabolic pathways. Previous work has associated specific transcriptional 
changes in gene networks with environmental factors. Here, we find that these 
same gene networks diverge in the absence of environmental change, suggesting 
these pathways may be central in generating phenotypic diversity as a result of 
both selective and random evolutionary forces. If this is the case, these genes 
and the functions they encode may represent universal axes of variation. Such 
axes that capture suites of interacting transcriptional changes during 
diversification improve our understanding of both global patterns in local 
adaptation and microdiversity, as well as evolutionary forces shaping algal 
cultivation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad218
PMCID: PMC10595192
PMID: 37874344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


152. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad233. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad233.

Evolutionary Insights from a Large-Scale Survey of Population-Genomic Variation.

Ye Z(1), Wei W(2), Pfrender ME(3), Lynch M(2).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation & Integrative Biology, School of 
Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China.
(2)Biodesign Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 
46556, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 May 03;:

The field of genomics has ushered in new methods for studying molecular-genetic 
variation in natural populations. However, most population-genomic studies still 
rely on small sample sizes (typically, <100 individuals) from single time 
points, leaving considerable uncertainties with respect to the behavior of 
relatively young (and rare) alleles and, owing to the large sampling variance of 
measures of variation, to the specific gene targets of unusually strong 
selection. Genomic sequences of ∼1,700 haplotypes distributed over a 10-year 
period from a natural population of the microcrustacean Daphnia pulex reveal 
evolutionary-genomic features at a refined scale, including previously hidden 
information on the behavior of rare alleles predicted by recent theory. 
Background selection, resulting from the recurrent introduction of deleterious 
alleles, appears to strongly influence the dynamics of neutral alleles, inducing 
indirect negative selection on rare variants and positive selection on common 
variants. Temporally fluctuating selection increases the persistence of 
nonsynonymous alleles with intermediate frequencies, while reducing standing 
levels of variation at linked silent sites. Combined with the results from an 
equally large metapopulation survey of the study species, classes of genes that 
are under strong positive selection can now be confidently identified in this 
key model organism. Most notable among rapidly evolving Daphnia genes are those 
associated with ribosomes, mitochondrial functions, sensory systems, and 
lifespan determination.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad233
PMCID: PMC10630549
PMID: 37863047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


153. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad232. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad232.

Insights into RAG Evolution from the Identification of "Missing Link" Family A 
RAGL Transposons.

Martin EC(1), Le Targa L(2), Tsakou-Ngouafo L(2), Fan TP(3), Lin CY(3), Xiao 
J(1), Huang Z(4), Yuan S(4)(5), Xu A(4)(6), Su YH(3), Petrescu AJ(7), Pontarotti 
P(2)(8), Schatz DG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520-8011, USA.
(2)Aix-Marseille Université, IRD, APHM, MEPHI, IHU Méditerranée Infection, 
Marseille 13005, France.
(3)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, 
Taiwan.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Guangdong Key Laboratory of 
Pharmaceutical Functional Genes, Southern Marine Science and Engineering 
Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou 510275, China.
(5)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Qingdao National Laboratory 
for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China.
(6)School of Life Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 
100029, China.
(7)Department of Bioinformatics and Structural Biochemistry, Institute of 
Biochemistry of the Romanian Academy, 060031 Bucharest, Romania.
(8)CNRS SNC 5039, 13005 Marseille, France.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Aug 20;:

A series of "molecular domestication" events are thought to have converted an 
invertebrate RAG-like (RAGL) transposase into the RAG1-RAG2 (RAG) recombinase, a 
critical enzyme for adaptive immunity in jawed vertebrates. The timing and order 
of these events are not well understood, in part because of a dearth of 
information regarding the invertebrate RAGL-A transposon family. In contrast to 
the abundant and divergent RAGL-B transposon family, RAGL-A most closely 
resembles RAG and is represented by a single orphan RAG1-like (RAG1L) gene in 
the genome of the hemichordate Ptychodera flava (PflRAG1L-A). Here, we provide 
evidence for the existence of complete RAGL-A transposons in the genomes of P. 
flava and several echinoderms. The predicted RAG1L-A and RAG2L-A proteins 
encoded by these transposons intermingle sequence features of jawed vertebrate 
RAG and RAGL-B transposases, leading to a prediction of DNA binding, catalytic, 
and transposition activities that are a hybrid of RAG and RAGL-B. Similarly, the 
terminal inverted repeats (TIRs) of the RAGL-A transposons combine features of 
both RAGL-B transposon TIRs and RAG recombination signal sequences. Unlike all 
previously described RAG2L proteins, RAG2L-A proteins contain an acidic hinge 
region, which we demonstrate is capable of efficiently inhibiting RAG-mediated 
transposition. Our findings provide evidence for a critical intermediate in RAG 
evolution and argue that certain adaptations thought to be specific to jawed 
vertebrates (e.g. the RAG2 acidic hinge) actually arose in invertebrates, 
thereby focusing attention on other adaptations as the pivotal steps in the 
completion of RAG domestication in jawed vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad232
PMCID: PMC10629977
PMID: 37850912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


154. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad226. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad226.

Correction to: The Impact of Genetic Surfing on Neutral Genomic Diversity.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad226
PMCID: PMC10577847
PMID: 37843051


155. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad230. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad230.

UPrimer: A Clade-Specific Primer Design Program Based on Nested-PCR Strategy and 
Its Applications in Amplicon Capture Phylogenomics.

Li J(1), Han G(1), Tian X(1), Liang D(1), Zhang P(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou 510275, China.

Amplicon capture is a promising target sequence capture approach for 
phylogenomic analyses, and the design of clade-specific nuclear protein-coding 
locus (NPCL) amplification primers is crucial for its successful application. In 
this study, we developed a primer design program called UPrimer that can quickly 
design clade-specific NPCL amplification primers based on genome data, without 
requiring manual intervention. Unlike other available primer design programs, 
UPrimer uses a nested-PCR strategy that greatly improves the amplification 
success rate of the designed primers. We examined all available metazoan genome 
data deposited in NCBI and developed NPCL primer sets for 21 metazoan groups 
with UPrimer, covering a wide range of taxa, including arthropods, mollusks, 
cnidarians, echinoderms, and vertebrates. On average, each clade-specific NPCL 
primer set comprises ∼1,000 NPCLs. PCR amplification tests were performed in 6 
metazoan groups, and the developed primers showed a PCR success rate exceeding 
95%. Furthermore, we demonstrated a phylogenetic case study in Lepidoptera, 
showing how NPCL primers can be used for phylogenomic analyses with amplicon 
capture. Our results indicated that using 100 NPCL probes recovered robust 
high-level phylogenetic relationships among butterflies, highlighting the 
utility of the newly designed NPCL primer sets for phylogenetic studies. We 
anticipate that the automated tool UPrimer and the developed NPCL primer sets 
for 21 metazoan groups will enable researchers to obtain phylogenomic data more 
efficiently and cost-effectively and accelerate the resolution of various parts 
of the Tree of Life.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad230
PMCID: PMC10630340
PMID: 37832226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing interests.


156. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad228. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad228.

Between but Not Within-Species Variation in the Distribution of Fitness Effects.

James J(1)(2), Kastally C(3)(4), Budde KB(5)(6), González-Martínez SC(7), Milesi 
P(1)(8), Pyhäjärvi T(3)(4), Lascoux M(1); GenTree Consortium.

Collaborators: Alizoti P, Alía R, Ambrosio O, Aravanopoulos FA, von Arx G, 
Audrey A, Auñón F, Avanzi C, Avramidou E, Bagnoli F, Bajc M, Ballesteros E, 
Barbas E, Del Barrio JMG, Bastias CC, Bastien C, Beffa G, Benavides R, Benoit V, 
Bernier F, Bignalet H, Bodineau G, Bouic D, Brodbeck S, Brunetto W, Buchovska J, 
Buret C, Buy M, Cabanillas-Saldaña AM, Carvalho B, Cavers S, Del Caño F, 
Cervantes S, Cheval N, Climent JM, Correard M, Cremer E, Danusevičius D, Dauphin 
B, Denou JL, Dokhelar B, Ducousso A, Fady B, Faivre-Rampant P, Farsakoglou AM, 
Fonti P, Ganopoulos I, Gilg O, De Girardi N, Graf R, Gray A, Grivet D, Gugerli 
F, Hartleitner C, Heer K, Hollenbach E, Hurel A, Issenhuth B, Jean F, Jorge V, 
Jouineau A, Kappner JP, Kesälahti R, Knutzen F, Kujala ST, Kumpula TA, 
Kärkkäinen K, Labriola M, Lalanne C, Lambertz J, Le-Provost G, Lejeune V, 
Lesur-Kupin I, Levillain J, Liesebach M, López-Quiroga D, Malliarou E, Marchon 
J, Mariotte N, Mas A, Matesanz S, Meier B, Meischner H, Michotey C, Morganti S, 
Myking T, Nievergelt D, Eskild Nilsen A, Notivol E, Ojeda DI, Olsson S, 
Opgenoorth L, Ostreng G, Pakull B, Perry A, Pinosio S, Piotti A, Plomion C, 
Poinot N, Pringarbe M, Puzos L, Raffin A, Ramírez-Valiente JA, Rellstab C, Remi 
D, Reutimann O, Richter S, Robledo-Arnuncio JJ, Rogier O, Sancho EM, Savolainen 
O, Scalabrin S, Schneck V, Schueler S, Scotti I, Segundo SS, Semerikov V, 
Slámová L, Spanu I, Sønstebø JH, Thevenet J, Tollefsrud MM, Turion N, Valladares 
F, Vendramin GG, Villar M, Westergren M, Westin J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Swedish Collegium of Advanced Study, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Forest Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Viikki Plant Science Centre, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Department of Forest Genetics and Forest Tree Breeding, 
Georg-August-University Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.
(6)Center of Biodiversity and Sustainable Land Use (CBL), University of 
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.
(7)National Research Institute for Agriculture, Food and the Environment 
(INRAE), University of Bordeaux, BIOGECO, Cestas, France.
(8)Science for Life Laboratory (SciLifeLab), Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

New mutations provide the raw material for evolution and adaptation. The 
distribution of fitness effects (DFE) describes the spectrum of effects of new 
mutations that can occur along a genome, and is, therefore, of vital interest in 
evolutionary biology. Recent work has uncovered striking similarities in the DFE 
between closely related species, prompting us to ask whether there is variation 
in the DFE among populations of the same species, or among species with 
different degrees of divergence, that is whether there is variation in the DFE 
at different levels of evolution. Using exome capture data from six tree species 
sampled across Europe we characterized the DFE for multiple species, and for 
each species, multiple populations, and investigated the factors potentially 
influencing the DFE, such as demography, population divergence, and genetic 
background. We find statistical support for the presence of variation in the DFE 
at the species level, even among relatively closely related species. However, we 
find very little difference at the population level, suggesting that differences 
in the DFE are primarily driven by deep features of species biology, and those 
evolutionarily recent events, such as demographic changes and local adaptation, 
have little impact.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad228
PMCID: PMC10630145
PMID: 37832225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad222. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad222.

Hybrid Epigenomes Reveal Extensive Local Genetic Changes to Chromatin 
Accessibility Contribute to Divergence in Embryonic Gene Expression Between 
Species.

Devens HR(1), Davidson PL(1), Byrne M(2)(3), Wray GA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)School of Medical Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(3)School of Life and Environmental Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia.
(4)Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, 
USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jan 04;:

Chromatin accessibility plays an important role in shaping gene expression, yet 
little is known about the genetic and molecular mechanisms that influence the 
evolution of chromatin configuration. Both local (cis) and distant (trans) 
genetic influences can in principle influence chromatin accessibility and are 
based on distinct molecular mechanisms. We, therefore, sought to characterize 
the role that each of these plays in altering chromatin accessibility in 2 
closely related sea urchin species. Using hybrids of Heliocidaris erythrogramma 
and Heliocidaris tuberculata, and adapting a statistical framework previously 
developed for the analysis of cis and trans influences on the transcriptome, we 
examined how these mechanisms shape the regulatory landscape at 3 important 
developmental stages, and compared our results to similar analyses of the 
transcriptome. We found extensive cis- and trans-based influences on 
evolutionary changes in chromatin, with cis effects generally larger in effect. 
Evolutionary changes in accessibility and gene expression are correlated, 
especially when expression has a local genetic basis. Maternal influences appear 
to have more of an effect on chromatin accessibility than on gene expression, 
persisting well past the maternal-to-zygotic transition. Chromatin accessibility 
near gene regulatory network genes appears to be distinctly regulated, with 
trans factors appearing to play an outsized role in the configuration of 
chromatin near these genes. Together, our results represent the first attempt to 
quantify cis and trans influences on evolutionary divergence in chromatin 
configuration in an outbred natural study system and suggest that chromatin 
regulation is more genetically complex than was previously appreciated.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad222
PMCID: PMC10638671
PMID: 37823438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


158. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad229. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad229.

Phylogenomics Reveals High Levels of Incomplete Lineage Sorting at the Ancestral 
Nodes of the Macaque Radiation.

Tan X(1)(2), Qi J(1), Liu Z(3), Fan P(4), Liu G(1), Zhang L(5), Shen Y(1), Li 
J(6), Roos C(5)(7), Zhou X(1), Li M(1).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)Geneplus-Beijing Institute, Beijing 102206, China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100049, China.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
(5)Primate Genetics Laboratory, German Primate Center, Leibniz Institute for 
Primate Research, Göttingen 37077, Germany.
(6)Key Laboratory of Bio-resources and Eco-environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, China.
(7)Gene Bank of Primates, German Primate Center, Leibniz Institute for Primate 
Research, Göttingen 37077, Germany.

The genus Macaca includes 23 species assigned into 4 to 7 groups. It exhibits 
the largest geographic range and represents the most successful example of 
adaptive radiation of nonhuman primates. However, intrageneric phylogenetic 
relationships among species remain controversial and have not been resolved so 
far. In this study, we conducted a phylogenomic analysis on 16 newly generated 
and 8 published macaque genomes. We found strong evidence supporting the 
division of this genus into 7 species groups. Incomplete lineage sorting (ILS) 
was the primary factor contributing to the discordance observed among gene 
trees; however, we also found evidence of hybridization events, specifically 
between the ancestral arctoides/sinica and silenus/nigra lineages that resulted 
in the hybrid formation of the fascicularis/mulatta group. Combined with fossil 
data, our phylogenomic data were used to establish a scenario for macaque 
radiation. These findings provide insights into ILS and potential ancient 
introgression events that were involved in the radiation of macaques, which will 
lead to a better understanding of the rapid speciation occurring in nonhuman 
primates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad229
PMCID: PMC10638670
PMID: 37823401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


159. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad225. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad225.

Comparative Population Transcriptomics Provide New Insight into the Evolutionary 
History and Adaptive Potential of World Ocean Krill.

Choquet M(1)(2), Lenner F(1)(3), Cocco A(1), Toullec G(4), Corre E(5), Toullec 
JY(6), Wallberg A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Laboratory for Biological Geochemistry, School of Architecture, Civil and 
Environmental Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(5)CNRS, Sorbonne Université, FR 2424, ABiMS Platform, Station Biologique de 
Roscoff, Roscoff, France.
(6)CNRS, UMR 7144, AD2M, Sorbonne Université, Station Biologique de Roscoff, 
Roscoff, France.

Genetic variation is instrumental for adaptation to changing environments but it 
is unclear how it is structured and contributes to adaptation in pelagic species 
lacking clear barriers to gene flow. Here, we applied comparative genomics to 
extensive transcriptome datasets from 20 krill species collected across the 
Atlantic, Indian, Pacific, and Southern Oceans. We compared genetic variation 
both within and between species to elucidate their evolutionary history and 
genomic bases of adaptation. We resolved phylogenetic interrelationships and 
uncovered genomic evidence to elevate the cryptic Euphausia similis var. armata 
into species. Levels of genetic variation and rates of adaptive protein 
evolution vary widely. Species endemic to the cold Southern Ocean, such as the 
Antarctic krill Euphausia superba, showed less genetic variation and lower 
evolutionary rates than other species. This could suggest a low adaptive 
potential to rapid climate change. We uncovered hundreds of candidate genes with 
signatures of adaptive evolution among Antarctic Euphausia but did not observe 
strong evidence of adaptive convergence with the predominantly Arctic 
Thysanoessa. We instead identified candidates for cold-adaptation that have also 
been detected in Antarctic fish, including genes that govern thermal reception 
such as TrpA1. Our results suggest parallel genetic responses to similar 
selection pressures across Antarctic taxa and provide new insights into the 
adaptive potential of important zooplankton already affected by climate change.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad225
PMCID: PMC10642690
PMID: 37816123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


160. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad221. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad221.

Horizontally Transferred Salivary Protein Promotes Insect Feeding by Suppressing 
Ferredoxin-Mediated Plant Defenses.

Wang YZ(1), Ye YX(2), Lu JB(1), Wang X(1), Lu HB(1), Zhang ZL(1), Ye ZX(1), Lu 
YW(1), Sun ZT(1), Chen JP(1), Li JM(1), Zhang CX(1), Huang HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, 
Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(2)Institute of Insect Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Herbivorous insects such as whiteflies, planthoppers, and aphids secrete 
abundant orphan proteins to facilitate feeding. Yet, how these genes are 
recruited and evolve to mediate plant-insect interaction remains unknown. In 
this study, we report a horizontal gene transfer (HGT) event from fungi to an 
ancestor of Aleyrodidae insects approximately 42 to 190 million years ago. 
BtFTSP1 is a salivary protein that is secreted into host plants during Bemisia 
tabaci feeding. It targets a defensive ferredoxin 1 in Nicotiana tabacum (NtFD1) 
and disrupts the NtFD1-NtFD1 interaction in plant cytosol, leading to the 
degradation of NtFD1 in a ubiquitin-dependent manner. Silencing BtFTSP1 has 
negative effects on B. tabaci feeding while overexpressing BtFTSP1 in N. tabacum 
benefits insects and rescues the adverse effect caused by NtFD1 overexpression. 
The association between BtFTSP1 and NtFD1 is newly evolved after HGT, with the 
homologous FTSP in its fungal donor failing to interact and destabilize NtFD1. 
Our study illustrates the important roles of horizontally transferred genes in 
plant-insect interactions and suggests the potential origin of orphan salivary 
genes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad221
PMCID: PMC10583550
PMID: 37804524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing interests.


161. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Dec 1;40(12):msad224. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad224.

Low Mutation Load in a Supergene Underpinning Alternative Male Mating Strategies 
in Ruff (Calidris pugnax).

Hill J(1), Enbody ED(1)(2), Bi H(1), Lamichhaney S(1)(3), Lei W(4), Chen J(5), 
Wei C(5), Liu Y(5), Schwochow D(6), Younis S(1)(7), Widemo F(8), Andersson 
L(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
SE-75123 Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, CA 95060, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44241, 
USA.
(4)Key Laboratory for Biodiversity Science and Ecological Engineering, National 
Demonstration Center for Experimental Life Sciences and Biotechnology Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, 100875 Beijing, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Ecology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, 510275 Guangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, SE-75007 Uppsala, Sweden.
(7)Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, School of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(8)Department of Wildlife, Fish and Environmental Studies, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, SE-901 83 Umeå, Sweden.
(9)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad249.

A paradox in evolutionary biology is how supergenes can maintain high fitness 
despite reduced effective population size, the suppression of recombination, and 
the expected accumulation of mutational load. The ruff supergene involves 2 rare 
inversion haplotypes (satellite and faeder). These are recessive lethals but 
with dominant effects on male mating strategies, plumage, and body size. 
Sequence divergence to the wild-type (independent) haplotype indicates that the 
inversion could be as old as 4 million years. Here, we have constructed a highly 
contiguous genome assembly of the inversion region for both the independent and 
satellite haplotypes. Based on the new data, we estimate that the recombination 
event(s) creating the satellite haplotype occurred only about 70,000 yr ago. 
Contrary to expectations for supergenes, we find no substantial expansion of 
repeats and only a modest mutation load on the satellite and faeder haplotypes 
despite high sequence divergence to the non-inverted haplotype (1.46%). The 
essential centromere protein N (CENPN) gene is disrupted by the inversion and is 
as well conserved on the inversion haplotypes as on the noninversion haplotype. 
These results suggest that the inversion may be much younger than previously 
thought. The low mutation load, despite recessive lethality, may be explained by 
the introgression of the inversion from a now extinct lineage.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad224
PMCID: PMC10700745
PMID: 37804117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


162. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad227. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad227.

Adaptive RAxML-NG: Accelerating Phylogenetic Inference under Maximum Likelihood 
using Dataset Difficulty.

Togkousidis A(1), Kozlov OM(1), Haag J(1), Höhler D(1), Stamatakis A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, 69118 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
76128 Karlsruhe, Germany.
(3)Biodiversity Computing Group, Institute of Computer Science, Foundation for 
Research and Technology - Hellas, GR - 711 10 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Phylogenetic inferences under the maximum likelihood criterion deploy heuristic 
tree search strategies to explore the vast search space. Depending on the input 
dataset, searches from different starting trees might all converge to a single 
tree topology. Often, though, distinct searches infer multiple topologies with 
large log-likelihood score differences or yield topologically highly distinct, 
yet almost equally likely, trees. Recently, Haag et al. introduced an approach 
to quantify, and implemented machine learning methods to predict, the dataset 
difficulty with respect to phylogenetic inference. Easy multiple sequence 
alignments (MSAs) exhibit a single likelihood peak on their likelihood surface, 
associated with a single tree topology to which most, if not all, independent 
searches rapidly converge. As difficulty increases, multiple locally optimal 
likelihood peaks emerge, yet from highly distinct topologies. To make use of 
this information, we introduce and implement an adaptive tree search heuristic 
in RAxML-NG, which modifies the thoroughness of the tree search strategy as a 
function of the predicted difficulty. Our adaptive strategy is based upon three 
observations. First, on easy datasets, searches converge rapidly and can hence 
be terminated at an earlier stage. Second, overanalyzing difficult datasets is 
hopeless, and thus it suffices to quickly infer only one of the numerous almost 
equally likely topologies to reduce overall execution time. Third, more 
extensive searches are justified and required on datasets with intermediate 
difficulty. While the likelihood surface exhibits multiple locally optimal peaks 
in this case, a small proportion of them is significantly better. Our 
experimental results for the adaptive heuristic on 9,515 empirical and 5,000 
simulated datasets with varying difficulty exhibit substantial speedups, 
especially on easy and difficult datasets (53% of total MSAs), where we observe 
average speedups of more than 10×. Further, approximately 94% of the inferred 
trees using the adaptive strategy are statistically indistinguishable from the 
trees inferred under the standard strategy (RAxML-NG).

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad227
PMCID: PMC10584362
PMID: 37804116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests statement None declared.


163. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad223. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad223.

Deciphering Evolutionary Trajectories of Lactate Dehydrogenases Provides New 
Insights into Allostery.

Robin AY(1), Brochier-Armanet C(2), Bertrand Q(1)(3), Barette C(4), Girard E(1), 
Madern D(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS, F-38000 Grenoble, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive, Université Claude Bernard 
Lyon 1, CNRS, UMR5558, Villeurbanne F-69622, France.
(3)Laboratory of Biomolecular Research, Biology and Chemistry Division, Paul 
Scherrer Institut, Villigen, Switzerland.
(4)Université Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Inserm, IRIG, BGE, Grenoble 38000, France.

Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH, EC.1.1.127) is an important enzyme engaged in the 
anaerobic metabolism of cells, catalyzing the conversion of pyruvate to lactate 
and NADH to NAD+. LDH is a relevant enzyme to investigate structure-function 
relationships. The present work provides the missing link in our understanding 
of the evolution of LDHs. This allows to explain (i) the various evolutionary 
origins of LDHs in eukaryotic cells and their further diversification and (ii) 
subtle phenotypic modifications with respect to their regulation capacity. We 
identified a group of cyanobacterial LDHs displaying eukaryotic-like LDH 
sequence features. The biochemical and structural characterization of 
Cyanobacterium aponinum LDH, taken as representative, unexpectedly revealed that 
it displays homotropic and heterotropic activation, typical of an allosteric 
enzyme, whereas it harbors a long N-terminal extension, a structural feature 
considered responsible for the lack of allosteric capacity in eukaryotic LDHs. 
Its crystallographic structure was solved in 2 different configurations typical 
of the R-active and T-inactive states encountered in allosteric LDHs. Structural 
comparisons coupled with our evolutionary analyses helped to identify 2 amino 
acid positions that could have had a major role in the attenuation and 
extinction of the allosteric activation in eukaryotic LDHs rather than the 
presence of the N-terminal extension. We tested this hypothesis by site-directed 
mutagenesis. The resulting C. aponinum LDH mutants displayed reduced allosteric 
capacity mimicking those encountered in plants and human LDHs. This study 
provides a new evolutionary scenario of LDHs that unifies descriptions of 
regulatory properties with structural and mutational patterns of these important 
enzymes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad223
PMCID: PMC10583557
PMID: 37797308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this 
article.


164. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad190. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad190.

Pangolin Genomes Offer Key Insights and Resources for the World's Most 
Trafficked Wild Mammals.

Heighton SP(1), Allio R(2), Murienne J(1), Salmona J(1), Meng H(3), Scornavacca 
C(2), Bastos ADS(4), Njiokou F(5), Pietersen DW(4), Tilak MK(2), Luo SJ(3), 
Delsuc F(2), Gaubert P(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Evolution et Diversité Biologique (EDB)- IRD-UPS-CNRS, Université 
Toulouse III, Toulouse, France.
(2)Institut des Sciences de l'Évolution de Montpellier (ISEM), Université de 
Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, Montpellier, France.
(3)The State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research of Life Sciences, 
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(4)Mammal Research Institute, Department of Zoology & Entomology, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(5)Laboratoire de Parasitologie et Ecologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université de 
Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(6)CIIMAR/CIMAR, Centro Interdisciplinar de Investigação Marinha e Ambiental, 
Universidade 16 do Porto, Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leixões, Porto, 
Portugal.

Pangolins form a group of scaly mammals that are trafficked at record numbers 
for their meat and purported medicinal properties. Despite their conservation 
concern, knowledge of their evolution is limited by a paucity of genomic data. 
We aim to produce exhaustive genomic resources that include 3,238 orthologous 
genes and whole-genome polymorphisms to assess the evolution of all eight extant 
pangolin species. Robust orthologous gene-based phylogenies recovered the 
monophyly of the three genera and highlighted the existence of an undescribed 
species closely related to Southeast Asian pangolins. Signatures of middle 
Miocene admixture between an extinct, possibly European, lineage and the 
ancestor of Southeast Asian pangolins, provide new insights into the early 
evolutionary history of the group. Demographic trajectories and genome-wide 
heterozygosity estimates revealed contrasts between continental versus island 
populations and species lineages, suggesting that conservation planning should 
consider intraspecific patterns. With the expected loss of genomic diversity 
from recent, extensive trafficking not yet realized in pangolins, we recommend 
that populations be genetically surveyed to anticipate any deleterious impact of 
the illegal trade. Finally, we produce a complete set of genomic resources that 
will be integral for future conservation management and forensic endeavors for 
pangolins, including tracing their illegal trade. These comprise the completion 
of whole-genomes for pangolins through the hybrid assembly of the first 
reference genome for the giant pangolin (Smutsia gigantea) and new draft genomes 
(∼43x-77x) for four additional species, as well as a database of orthologous 
genes with over 3.4 million polymorphic sites.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad190
PMCID: PMC10551234
PMID: 37794645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing/conflict of interests.


165. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad206. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad206.

Selection on Visual Opsin Genes in Diurnal Neotropical Frogs and Loss of the 
SWS2 Opsin in Poison Frogs.

Wan YC(1)(2)(3), Navarrete Méndez MJ(1)(4), O'Connell LA(5), Uricchio LH(1)(6), 
Roland AB(7)(8), Maan ME(9), Ron SR(4), Betancourth-Cundar M(10), Pie 
MR(11)(12), Howell KA(13), Richards-Zawacki CL(13), Cummings ME(14), Cannatella 
DC(14)(15), Santos JC(16), Tarvin RD(1).

Author information:
(1)Museum of Vertebrate Zoology and Department of Integrative Biology, 
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, University College Dublin, 
Belfield, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Museo de Zoología, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Pontificia 
Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador.
(5)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA.
(7)FAS Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(8)Research Centre on Animal Cognition (CRCA), Centre for Integrative Biology 
(CBI), UMR5169 CNRS, Toulouse University, Toulouse, France.
(9)Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(10)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, 
Colombia.
(11)Department of Zoology, Universidade Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.
(12)Biology Department, Edge Hill University, Ormskirk, United Kingdom.
(13)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA.
(14)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
TX, USA.
(15)Biodiversity Center, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(16)Department of Biological Sciences, St. John's University, New York City, NY, 
USA.

Amphibians are ideal for studying visual system evolution because their biphasic 
(aquatic and terrestrial) life history and ecological diversity expose them to a 
broad range of visual conditions. Here, we evaluate signatures of selection on 
visual opsin genes across Neotropical anurans and focus on three diurnal clades 
that are well-known for the concurrence of conspicuous colors and chemical 
defense (i.e., aposematism): poison frogs (Dendrobatidae), Harlequin toads 
(Bufonidae: Atelopus), and pumpkin toadlets (Brachycephalidae: Brachycephalus). 
We found evidence of positive selection on 44 amino acid sites in LWS, SWS1, 
SWS2, and RH1 opsin genes, of which one in LWS and two in RH1 have been 
previously identified as spectral tuning sites in other vertebrates. Given that 
anurans have mostly nocturnal habits, the patterns of selection revealed new 
sites that might be important in spectral tuning for frogs, potentially for 
adaptation to diurnal habits and for color-based intraspecific communication. 
Furthermore, we provide evidence that SWS2, normally expressed in rod cells in 
frogs and some salamanders, has likely been lost in the ancestor of 
Dendrobatidae, suggesting that under low-light levels, dendrobatids have 
inferior wavelength discrimination compared to other frogs. This loss might 
follow the origin of diurnal activity in dendrobatids and could have 
implications for their behavior. Our analyses show that assessments of opsin 
diversification in across taxa could expand our understanding of the role of 
sensory system evolution in ecological adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad206
PMCID: PMC10548314
PMID: 37791477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: This publication is based 
in part on work by D.C.C. while serving at the National Science Foundation. Any 
opinion, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material 
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
National Science Foundation or United States government.


166. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad208. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad208.

Genomic Signatures Associated with Transitions to Viviparity in 
Cyprinodontiformes.

Yusuf LH(1), Saldívar Lemus Y(1)(2), Thorpe P(3)(4), Macías Garcia C(5), Ritchie 
MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Biological Diversity, School of Biology, University of St Andrews, 
St Andrews, UK.
(2)Department of Biology, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, USA.
(3)The Data Analysis Group, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, 
Dundee, UK.
(4)School of Medicine, University of North Haugh, St Andrews KY16 9TF, UK.
(5)Instituto de Ecologia, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad 
Universitaria, Mexico City CdMx, Mexico.

The transition from oviparity to viviparity has occurred independently over 150 
times across vertebrates, presenting one of the most compelling cases of 
phenotypic convergence. However, whether the repeated, independent evolution of 
viviparity is driven by redeployment of similar genetic mechanisms and whether 
these leave a common signature in genomic divergence remains largely unknown. 
Although recent investigations into the evolution of viviparity have 
demonstrated striking similarity among the genes and molecular pathways involved 
across disparate vertebrate groups, quantitative tests for genome-wide 
convergent have provided ambivalent answers. Here, we investigate the potential 
role of molecular convergence during independent transitions to viviparity 
across an order of ray-finned freshwater fish (Cyprinodontiformes). We assembled 
de novo genomes and utilized publicly available genomes of viviparous and 
oviparous species to test for molecular convergence across both coding and 
noncoding regions. We found no evidence for an excess of molecular convergence 
in amino acid substitutions and in rates of sequence divergence, implying 
independent genetic changes are associated with these transitions. However, both 
statistical power and biological confounds could constrain our ability to detect 
significant correlated evolution. We therefore identified candidate genes with 
potential signatures of molecular convergence in viviparous Cyprinodontiformes 
lineages. Motif enrichment and gene ontology analyses suggest transcriptional 
changes associated with early morphogenesis, brain development, and immunity 
occurred alongside the evolution of viviparity. Overall, however, our findings 
indicate that independent transitions to viviparity in these fish are not 
strongly associated with an excess of molecular convergence, but a few genes 
show convincing evidence of convergent evolution.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad208
PMCID: PMC10568250
PMID: 37789509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad219. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad219.

Diversification of Ubiquinone Biosynthesis via Gene Duplications, Transfers, 
Losses, and Parallel Evolution.

Kazemzadeh K(1), Pelosi L(1), Chenal C(1), Chobert SC(1), Hajj Chehade M(1), 
Jullien M(1), Flandrin L(1), Schmitt W(1), He Q(1), Bouvet E(1), Jarzynka M(1), 
Varoquaux N(1), Junier I(1), Pierrel F(1), Abby SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, UMR 5525, VetAgro Sup, Grenoble INP, TIMC, 38000 
Grenoble, France.

The availability of an ever-increasing diversity of prokaryotic genomes and 
metagenomes represents a major opportunity to understand and decipher the 
mechanisms behind the functional diversification of microbial biosynthetic 
pathways. However, it remains unclear to what extent a pathway producing a 
specific molecule from a specific precursor can diversify. In this study, we 
focus on the biosynthesis of ubiquinone (UQ), a crucial coenzyme that is central 
to the bioenergetics and to the functioning of a wide variety of enzymes in 
Eukarya and Pseudomonadota (a subgroup of the formerly named Proteobacteria). UQ 
biosynthesis involves three hydroxylation reactions on contiguous carbon atoms. 
We and others have previously shown that these reactions are catalyzed by 
different sets of UQ-hydroxylases that belong either to the iron-dependent Coq7 
family or to the more widespread flavin monooxygenase (FMO) family. Here, we 
combine an experimental approach with comparative genomics and phylogenetics to 
reveal how UQ-hydroxylases evolved different selectivities within the 
constrained framework of the UQ pathway. It is shown that the UQ-FMOs 
diversified via at least three duplication events associated with two cases of 
neofunctionalization and one case of subfunctionalization, leading to six 
subfamilies with distinct hydroxylation selectivity. We also demonstrate 
multiple transfers of the UbiM enzyme and the convergent evolution of UQ-FMOs 
toward the same function, which resulted in two independent losses of the Coq7 
ancestral enzyme. Diversification of this crucial biosynthetic pathway has 
therefore occurred via a combination of parallel evolution, gene duplications, 
transfers, and losses.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad219
PMCID: PMC10597321
PMID: 37788637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad217. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad217.

Chance Favors the Prepared Genomes: Horizontal Transfer Shapes the Emergence of 
Antibiotic Resistance Mutations in Core Genes.

Coluzzi C(1), Guillemet M(1), Mazzamurro F(1)(2), Touchon M(1), Godfroid M(3), 
Achaz G(3), Glaser P(4), Rocha EPC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, CNRS, UMR3525, Microbial 
Evolutionary Genomics, Paris, France.
(2)Collège Doctoral, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(3)SMILE Group, Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Collège 
de France, CNRS, INSERM, Université PSL, Paris, France.
(4)Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris Cité, CNRS, UMR6047, Unité EERA, Paris, 
France.

Bacterial lineages acquire novel traits at diverse rates in part because the 
genetic background impacts the successful acquisition of novel genes by 
horizontal transfer. Yet, how horizontal transfer affects the subsequent 
evolution of core genes remains poorly understood. Here, we studied the 
evolution of resistance to quinolones in Escherichia coli accounting for 
population structure. We found 60 groups of genes whose gain or loss induced an 
increase in the probability of subsequently becoming resistant to quinolones by 
point mutations in the gyrase and topoisomerase genes. These groups include 
functions known to be associated with direct mitigation of the effect of 
quinolones, with metal uptake, cell growth inhibition, biofilm formation, and 
sugar metabolism. Many of them are encoded in phages or plasmids. Although some 
of the chronologies may reflect epidemiological trends, many of these groups 
encoded functions providing latent phenotypes of antibiotic low-level 
resistance, tolerance, or persistence under quinolone treatment. The mutations 
providing resistance were frequent and accumulated very quickly. Their emergence 
was found to increase the rate of acquisition of other antibiotic resistances 
setting the path for multidrug resistance. Hence, our findings show that 
horizontal gene transfer shapes the subsequent emergence of adaptive mutations 
in core genes. In turn, these mutations further affect the subsequent evolution 
of resistance by horizontal gene transfer. Given the substantial gene flow 
within bacterial genomes, interactions between horizontal transfer and point 
mutations in core genes may be a key to the success of adaptation processes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad217
PMCID: PMC10575684
PMID: 37788575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


169. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad220. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad220.

Asymmetric Evolution of Protein Domains in the Leucine-Rich Repeat Receptor-Like 
Kinase Family of Plant Signaling Proteins.

Man J(1), Harrington TA(1), Lally K(1), Bartlett ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA 
01002, USA.

The coding sequences of developmental genes are expected to be deeply conserved, 
with cis-regulatory change driving the modulation of gene function. In contrast, 
proteins with roles in defense are expected to evolve rapidly, in molecular arms 
races with pathogens. However, some gene families include both developmental and 
defense genes. In these families, does the tempo and mode of evolution differ 
between genes with divergent functions, despite shared ancestry and structure? 
The leucine-rich repeat receptor-like kinase (LRR-RLKs) protein family includes 
members with roles in plant development and defense, thus providing an ideal 
system for answering this question. LRR-RLKs are receptors that traverse plasma 
membranes. LRR domains bind extracellular ligands; RLK domains initiate 
intracellular signaling cascades in response to ligand binding. In LRR-RLKs with 
roles in defense, LRR domains evolve faster than RLK domains. To determine 
whether this asymmetry extends to LRR-RLKs that function primarily in 
development, we assessed evolutionary rates and tested for selection acting on 
11 subfamilies of LRR-RLKs, using deeply sampled protein trees. To assess 
functional evolution, we performed heterologous complementation assays in 
Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis). We found that the LRR domains of all tested 
LRR-RLK proteins evolved faster than their cognate RLK domains. All tested 
subfamilies of LRR-RLKs had strikingly similar patterns of molecular evolution, 
despite divergent functions. Heterologous transformation experiments revealed 
that multiple mechanisms likely contribute to the evolution of LRR-RLK function, 
including escape from adaptive conflict. Our results indicate specific and 
distinct evolutionary pressures acting on LRR versus RLK domains, despite 
diverse organismal roles for LRR-RLK proteins.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad220
PMCID: PMC10588794
PMID: 37787619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. None declared.


170. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad216. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad216.

Tensor Decomposition-based Feature Extraction and Classification to Detect 
Natural Selection from Genomic Data.

Amin MR(1), Hasan M(1), Arnab SP(1), DeGiorgio M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Florida Atlantic 
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Mar 29;:

Inferences of adaptive events are important for learning about traits, such as 
human digestion of lactose after infancy and the rapid spread of viral variants. 
Early efforts toward identifying footprints of natural selection from genomic 
data involved development of summary statistic and likelihood methods. However, 
such techniques are grounded in simple patterns or theoretical models that limit 
the complexity of settings they can explore. Due to the renaissance in 
artificial intelligence, machine learning methods have taken center stage in 
recent efforts to detect natural selection, with strategies such as 
convolutional neural networks applied to images of haplotypes. Yet, limitations 
of such techniques include estimation of large numbers of model parameters under 
nonconvex settings and feature identification without regard to location within 
an image. An alternative approach is to use tensor decomposition to extract 
features from multidimensional data although preserving the latent structure of 
the data, and to feed these features to machine learning models. Here, we adopt 
this framework and present a novel approach termed T-REx, which extracts 
features from images of haplotypes across sampled individuals using tensor 
decomposition, and then makes predictions from these features using classical 
machine learning methods. As a proof of concept, we explore the performance of 
T-REx on simulated neutral and selective sweep scenarios and find that it has 
high power and accuracy to discriminate sweeps from neutrality, robustness to 
common technical hurdles, and easy visualization of feature importance. 
Therefore, T-REx is a powerful addition to the toolkit for detecting adaptive 
processes from genomic data.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad216
PMCID: PMC10581699
PMID: 37772983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad201. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad201.

Correction to: Recovery of Deleted Deep Sequencing Data Sheds More Light on the 
Early Wuhan SARS-CoV-2 Epidemic.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5211-5224.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad201
PMCID: PMC10540883
PMID: 37772800


172. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad215. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad215.

A Chromosome-Level Genome Assembly of the Reef Stonefish (Synanceia verrucosa) 
Provides Novel Insights into Stonustoxin (sntx) Genes.

Tang T(1), Huang Y(2)(3), Peng C(2)(4), Liao Y(1), Lv Y(5), Shi Q(2)(4)(5), Gao 
B(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education, 
School of Pharmacy, Hainan Medical University, Haikou, Hainan, China.
(2)Shenzhen Key Lab of Marine Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of 
Molecular Breeding in Marine Economic Animals, BGI Academy of Marine Sciences, 
BGI Marine, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Breeding Biotechnology and Sustainable Aquaculture, 
Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(4)BGI-Marine Research Institute for Biomedical Technology, Shenzhen Huahong 
Marine Biomedicine Co. Ltd., Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province for Fishes Conservation and Utilization in 
the Upper Reaches of the Yangtze River, College of Life Sciences, Neijiang 
Normal University, Neijiang, Sichuan, China.

Reef stonefish (Synanceia verrucosa) is one of the most venomous fishes, but its 
biomedical study has been restricted to molecular cloning and purification of 
its toxins, instead of high-throughput genetic research on related toxin genes. 
In this study, we constructed a chromosome-level haplotypic genome assembly for 
the reef stonefish. The genome was assembled into 24 pseudo-chromosomes, and the 
length totaled 689.74 Mb, reaching a contig N50 of 11.97 Mb and containing 97.8% 
of complete BUSCOs. A total of 24,050 protein-coding genes were annotated, of 
which metalloproteinases, C-type lectins, and stonustoxins (sntx) were the most 
abundant putative toxin genes. Multitissue transcriptomic and venom proteomic 
data showed that sntx genes, especially those clustered within a 50-kb region on 
the chromosome 2, had higher transcription levels than other types of toxins as 
well as those sntx genes scatteringly distributed on other chromosomes. Further 
comparative genomic analysis predicted an expansion of sntx-like genes in the 
Percomorpha lineage including nonvenomous fishes, but Scorpaenoidei species 
experienced extra independent sntx duplication events, marking the clear-cut 
origin of authentic toxic stonustoxins. In summary, this high-quality genome 
assembly and related comparative analysis of toxin genes highlight valuable 
genetic differences for potential involvement in the evolution of venoms among 
Scorpaeniformes fishes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad215
PMCID: PMC10566576
PMID: 37770059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad213. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad213.

Evolution of the Mutation Spectrum Across a Mammalian Phylogeny.

Beichman AC(1), Robinson J(2), Lin M(3), Moreno-Estrada A(4), Nigenda-Morales 
S(5), Harris K(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(4)National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity, Advanced Genomics Unit 
(UGA-LANGEBIO), CINVESTAV, Irapuato, Mexico.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, California State University, San Marcos, 
San Marcos, CA, USA.
(6)Herbold Computational Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, 
Seattle, WA, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jun 01;:

Although evolutionary biologists have long theorized that variation in DNA 
repair efficacy might explain some of the diversity of lifespan and cancer 
incidence across species, we have little data on the variability of normal 
germline mutagenesis outside of humans. Here, we shed light on the spectrum and 
etiology of mutagenesis across mammals by quantifying mutational sequence 
context biases using polymorphism data from thirteen species of mice, apes, 
bears, wolves, and cetaceans. After normalizing the mutation spectrum for 
reference genome accessibility and k-mer content, we use the Mantel test to 
deduce that mutation spectrum divergence is highly correlated with genetic 
divergence between species, whereas life history traits like reproductive age 
are weaker predictors of mutation spectrum divergence. Potential bioinformatic 
confounders are only weakly related to a small set of mutation spectrum 
features. We find that clock-like mutational signatures previously inferred from 
human cancers cannot explain the phylogenetic signal exhibited by the mammalian 
mutation spectrum, despite the ability of these signatures to fit each species' 
3-mer spectrum with high cosine similarity. In contrast, parental aging 
signatures inferred from human de novo mutation data appear to explain much of 
the 1-mer spectrum's phylogenetic signal in combination with a novel mutational 
signature. We posit that future models purporting to explain the etiology of 
mammalian mutagenesis need to capture the fact that more closely related species 
have more similar mutation spectra; a model that fits each marginal spectrum 
with high cosine similarity is not guaranteed to capture this hierarchy of 
mutation spectrum variation among species.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad213
PMCID: PMC10566577
PMID: 37770035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad214. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad214.

Genomic Variation, Population History, and Long-Term Genetic Adaptation to High 
Altitudes in Tibetan Partridge (Perdix hodgsoniae).

Palacios C(1), Wang P(2), Wang N(3), Brown MA(1), Capatosto L(1), Du J(4), Jiang 
J(3), Zhang Q(3), Dahal N(5), Lamichhaney S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, OH 44242, 
USA.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Biotechnology, College of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, P. R. China.
(3)School of Ecology and Nature Conservation, Beijing Forestry University, 
Beijing 100083, P. R. China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, P. R. China.
(5)Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, 
Palampur, HP 176061, India.

Species residing across elevational gradients display adaptations in response to 
environmental changes such as oxygen availability, ultraviolet radiation, and 
temperature. Here, we study genomic variation, gene expression, and long-term 
adaptation in Tibetan Partridge (Perdix hodgsoniae) populations residing across 
the elevational gradient of the Tibetan Plateau. We generated a high-quality 
draft genome and used it to carry out downstream population genomic and 
transcriptomic analysis. The P. hodgsoniae populations residing across various 
elevations were genetically distinct, and their phylogenetic clustering was 
consistent with their geographic distribution. We identified possible evidence 
of gene flow between populations residing in <3,000 and >4,200 m elevation that 
is consistent with known habitat expansion of high-altitude populations of P. 
hodgsoniae to a lower elevation. We identified a 60 kb haplotype encompassing 
the Estrogen Receptor 1 (ESR1) gene, showing strong genetic divergence between 
populations of P. hodgsoniae. We identified six single nucleotide polymorphisms 
within the ESR1 gene fixed for derived alleles in high-altitude populations that 
are strongly conserved across vertebrates. We also compared blood transcriptome 
profiles and identified differentially expressed genes (such as GAPDH, LDHA, and 
ALDOC) that correlated with differences in altitude among populations of P. 
hodgsoniae. These candidate genes from population genomics and transcriptomics 
analysis were enriched for neutrophil degranulation and glycolysis pathways, 
which are known to respond to hypoxia and hence may contribute to long-term 
adaptation to high altitudes in P. hodgsoniae. Our results highlight Tibetan 
Partridges as a useful model to study molecular mechanisms underlying long-term 
adaptation to high altitudes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad214
PMCID: PMC10583571
PMID: 37768198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad188. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad188.

Whole-genome Comparisons Identify Repeated Regulatory Changes Underlying 
Convergent Appendage Evolution in Diverse Fish Lineages.

Chen HI(1), Turakhia Y(2), Bejerano G(1)(3)(4)(5), Kingsley DM(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, 
San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University School of Engineering, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jan 31;:

Fins are major functional appendages of fish that have been repeatedly modified 
in different lineages. To search for genomic changes underlying natural fin 
diversity, we compared the genomes of 36 percomorph fish species that span over 
100 million years of evolution and either have complete or reduced pelvic and 
caudal fins. We identify 1,614 genomic regions that are well-conserved in 
fin-complete species but missing from multiple fin-reduced lineages. Recurrent 
deletions of conserved sequences in wild fin-reduced species are enriched for 
functions related to appendage development, suggesting that convergent fin 
reduction at the organismal level is associated with repeated genomic deletions 
near fin-appendage development genes. We used sequencing and functional enhancer 
assays to confirm that PelA, a Pitx1 enhancer previously linked to recurrent 
pelvic loss in sticklebacks, has also been independently deleted and may have 
contributed to the fin morphology in distantly related pelvic-reduced species. 
We also identify a novel enhancer that is conserved in the majority of 
percomorphs, drives caudal fin expression in transgenic stickleback, is missing 
in tetraodontiform, syngnathid, and synbranchid species with caudal fin 
reduction, and alters caudal fin development when targeted by genome editing. 
Our study illustrates a broadly applicable strategy for mapping phenotypes to 
genotypes across a tree of vertebrate species and highlights notable new 
examples of regulatory genomic hotspots that have been used to evolve recurrent 
phenotypes across 100 million years of fish evolution.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad188
PMCID: PMC10516590
PMID: 37739926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. H.I.C., Y.T., 
G.B., and D.M.K. have no conflicts of interest to declare.


176. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad212. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad212.

Detecting Episodic Evolution through Bayesian Inference of Molecular Clock 
Models.

Tay JH(1), Baele G(2), Duchene S(1).

Author information:
(1)Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Molecular evolutionary rate variation is a key aspect of the evolution of many 
organisms that can be modeled using molecular clock models. For example, fixed 
local clocks revealed the role of episodic evolution in the emergence of 
SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern. Like all statistical models, however, the 
reliability of such inferences is contingent on an assessment of statistical 
evidence. We present a novel Bayesian phylogenetic approach for detecting 
episodic evolution. It consists of computing Bayes factors, as the ratio of 
posterior and prior odds of evolutionary rate increases, effectively quantifying 
support for the effect size. We conducted an extensive simulation study to 
illustrate the power of this method and benchmarked it to formal model 
comparison of a range of molecular clock models using (log) marginal likelihood 
estimation, and to inference under a random local clock model. Quantifying 
support for the effect size has higher sensitivity than formal model testing and 
is straight-forward to compute, because it only needs samples from the posterior 
and prior distribution. However, formal model testing has the advantage of 
accommodating a wide range molecular clock models. We also assessed the ability 
of an automated approach, known as the random local clock, where branches under 
episodic evolution may be detected without their a priori definition. In an 
empirical analysis of a data set of SARS-CoV-2 genomes, we find "very strong" 
evidence for episodic evolution. Our results provide guidelines and practical 
methods for Bayesian detection of episodic evolution, as well as avenues for 
further research into this phenomenon.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad212
PMCID: PMC10560005
PMID: 37738550


177. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad211. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad211.

Inference of Coalescence Times and Variant Ages Using Convolutional Neural 
Networks.

Nait Saada J(1), Tsangalidou Z(1), Stricker M(1), Palamara PF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Accurate inference of the time to the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) 
between pairs of individuals and of the age of genomic variants is key in 
several population genetic analyses. We developed a likelihood-free approach, 
called CoalNN, which uses a convolutional neural network to predict pairwise 
TMRCAs and allele ages from sequencing or SNP array data. CoalNN is trained 
through simulation and can be adapted to varying parameters, such as demographic 
history, using transfer learning. Across several simulated scenarios, CoalNN 
matched or outperformed the accuracy of model-based approaches for pairwise 
TMRCA and allele age prediction. We applied CoalNN to settings for which 
model-based approaches are under-developed and performed analyses to gain 
insights into the set of features it uses to perform TMRCA prediction. We next 
used CoalNN to analyze 2,504 samples from 26 populations in the 1,000 Genome 
Project data set, inferring the age of ∼80 million variants. We observed 
substantial variation across populations and for variants predicted to be 
pathogenic, reflecting heterogeneous demographic histories and the action of 
negative selection. We used CoalNN's predicted allele ages to construct 
genome-wide annotations capturing the signature of past negative selection. We 
performed LD-score regression analysis of heritability using summary association 
statistics from 63 independent complex traits and diseases (average N=314k), 
observing increased annotation-specific effects on heritability compared to a 
previous allele age annotation. These results highlight the effectiveness of 
using likelihood-free, simulation-trained models to infer properties of gene 
genealogies in large genomic data sets.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad211
PMCID: PMC10581698
PMID: 37738175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad210. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad210.

Evolutionary Analyses of Gene Expression Divergence in Panicum hallii: Exploring 
Constitutive and Plastic Responses Using Reciprocal Transplants.

Bhaskara GB(1), Haque T(1), Bonnette JE(1), Napier JD(1), Bauer D(2), Schmutz 
J(2)(3), Juenger TE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
TX, USA.
(2)DOE Joint Genome Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
CA, USA.
(3)Genome Sequencing Center, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, 
Huntsville, AL, USA.

The evolution of gene expression is thought to be an important mechanism of 
local adaptation and ecological speciation. Gene expression divergence occurs 
through the evolution of cis- polymorphisms and through more widespread effects 
driven by trans-regulatory factors. Here, we explore expression and sequence 
divergence in a large sample of Panicum hallii accessions encompassing the 
species range using a reciprocal transplantation experiment. We observed 
widespread genotype and transplant site drivers of expression divergence, with a 
limited number of genes exhibiting genotype-by-site interactions. We used a 
modified FST-QST outlier approach (QPC analysis) to detect local adaptation. We 
identified 514 genes with constitutive expression divergence above and beyond 
the levels expected under neutral processes. However, no plastic expression 
responses met our multiple testing correction as QPC outliers. Constitutive QPC 
outlier genes were involved in a number of developmental processes and responses 
to abiotic environments. Leveraging earlier expression quantitative trait loci 
results, we found a strong enrichment of expression divergence, including for 
QPC outliers, in genes previously identified with cis and cis-environment 
interactions but found no patterns related to trans-factors. Population genetic 
analyses detected elevated sequence divergence of promoters and coding sequence 
of constitutive expression outliers but little evidence for positive selection 
on these proteins. Our results are consistent with a hypothesis of 
cis-regulatory divergence as a primary driver of expression divergence in P. 
hallii.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad210
PMCID: PMC10556983
PMID: 37738160


179. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad209. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad209.

A Proofreading Mutation with an Allosteric Effect Allows a Cluster of SARS-CoV-2 
Viruses to Rapidly Evolve.

Mack AH(1), Menzies G(1), Southgate A(1), Jones DD(1), Connor TR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biosciences Division, School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, 
UK.
(2)Pathogen Genomics Unit, Public Health Wales NHS Trust, Cardiff, UK.

The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase of the severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 virus is error prone, with errors being corrected by the 
exonuclease (NSP14) proofreading mechanism. However, the mutagenesis and 
subsequent evolutionary trajectory of the virus is mediated by the delicate 
interplay of replicase fidelity and environmental pressures. Here, we have shown 
that a single, distal mutation (F60S) in NSP14 can have a profound impact upon 
proofreading with an increased accumulation of mutations and elevated 
evolutionary rate being observed. Understanding the implications of these 
changes is crucial, as these underlying mutational processes may have important 
implications for understanding the population-wide evolution of the virus. This 
study underscores the urgent need for continued research into the replicative 
mechanisms of this virus to combat its continued impact on global health, 
through the re-emergence of immuno-evasive variants.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad209
PMCID: PMC10553922
PMID: 37738143


180. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad205. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad205.

Genetic Origins and Adaptive Evolution of the Deng People on the Tibetan 
Plateau.

Ge X(1), Lu Y(2), Chen S(3), Gao Y(2), Ma L(4)(5), Liu L(4)(5), Liu J(2), Ma 
X(1), Kang L(4)(5), Xu S(2)(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and 
Health, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Human Phenome Institute, 
Zhangjiang Fudan International Innovation Center, Center for Evolutionary 
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of High-Altitude Environment and Genes Related to Disease of 
Tibet Ministry of Education, Xizang Minzu University, Xianyang, Shaanxi, China.
(5)Research Center for Tibetan Social Governance, Key Research Institute of 
Humanities and Social Sciences in Xizang Minzu University, State Ethnic Affairs 
Commission, Xizang Minzu University, Xianyang, Shaanxi, China.
(6)Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation Liver Cancer Institute, 
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(7)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and Development, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.

The Tibetan Plateau is populated by diverse ethnic groups, but most of them are 
underrepresented in genomics studies compared with the Tibetans (TIB). Here, to 
gain further insight into the genetic diversity and evolutionary history of the 
people living in the Tibetan Plateau, we sequenced 54 whole genomes of the Deng 
people with high coverage (30-60×) and analyzed the data together with that of 
TIB and Sherpas, as well as 968 ancient Asian genomes and available archaic and 
modern human data. We identified 17.74 million novel single-nucleotide variants 
from the newly sequenced genomes, although the Deng people showed reduced 
genomic diversity and a relatively small effective population size. Compared 
with the other Tibetan highlander groups which are highly admixed, the Deng 
people are dominated by a sole ancestry that could be traced to some ancient 
northern East Asian populations. The divergence between Deng and Tibetan people 
(∼4,700-7,200 years) was more recent than that between highlanders and the Han 
Chinese (Deng-HAN, ∼9,000-14,000 years; TIB-HAN, 7,200-10,000 years). Adaptive 
genetic variants (AGVs) identified in the Deng are only partially shared with 
those previously reported in the TIB like HLA-DQB1, whereas others like KLHL12 
were not reported in TIB. In contrast, the top candidate genes harboring AGVs as 
previously identified in TIB, like EPAS1 and EGLN1, do not show strong positive 
selection signals in Deng. Interestingly, Deng also showed a different archaic 
introgression scenario from that observed in the TIB. Our results suggest that 
convergent adaptation might be prevalent on the Tibetan Plateau.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad205
PMCID: PMC10584363
PMID: 37713634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Nov 3;40(11):msad207. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad207.

Genomics Reveals Complex Population History and Unexpected Diversity of Eurasian 
Otters (Lutra lutra) in Britain Relative to Genetic Methods.

du Plessis SJ(1), Blaxter M(2), Koepfli KP(3)(4), Chadwick EA(1), Hailer F(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(2)Tree of Life, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Smithsonian-Mason School of Conservation, George Mason University, Front 
Royal, VA, USA.
(4)Centre for Species Survival, Smithsonian's National Zoo and Conservation 
Biology Institute, Washington, DC, USA.

Conservation genetic analyses of many endangered species have been based on 
genotyping of microsatellite loci and sequencing of short fragments of mtDNA. 
The increase in power and resolution afforded by whole genome approaches may 
challenge conclusions made on limited numbers of loci and maternally inherited 
haploid markers. Here, we provide a matched comparison of whole genome 
sequencing versus microsatellite and control region (CR) genotyping for Eurasian 
otters (Lutra lutra). Previous work identified four genetically differentiated 
"stronghold" populations of otter in Britain, derived from regional populations 
that survived the population crash of the 1950s-1980s. Using whole genome 
resequencing data from 45 samples from across the British stronghold 
populations, we confirmed some aspects of population structure derived from 
previous marker-driven studies. Importantly, we showed that genomic signals of 
the population crash bottlenecks matched evidence from otter population surveys. 
Unexpectedly, two strongly divergent mitochondrial lineages were identified that 
were undetectable using CR fragments, and otters in the east of England were 
genetically distinct and surprisingly variable. We hypothesize that this 
previously unsuspected variability may derive from past releases of Eurasian 
otters from other, non-British source populations in England around the time of 
the population bottleneck. Our work highlights that even reasonably well-studied 
species may harbor genetic surprises, if studied using modern high-throughput 
sequencing methods.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad207
PMCID: PMC10630326
PMID: 37713621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad202. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad202.

Recruitment of a Middling Promiscuous Enzyme Drives Adaptive Metabolic Evolution 
in Escherichia coli.

Campbell RP(1), Whittington AC(1)(2), Zorio DAR(2), Miller BG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Florida State University, 
Tallahassee, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, 
USA.

A key step in metabolic pathway evolution is the recruitment of promiscuous 
enzymes to perform new functions. Despite the recognition that promiscuity is 
widespread in biology, factors dictating the preferential recruitment of one 
promiscuous enzyme over other candidates are unknown. Escherichia coli contains 
four sugar kinases that are candidates for recruitment when the native 
glucokinase machinery is deleted-allokinase (AlsK), manno(fructo)kinase (Mak), 
N-acetylmannosamine kinase (NanK), and N-acetylglucosamine kinase (NagK). The 
catalytic efficiencies of these enzymes are 103- to 105-fold lower than native 
glucokinases, ranging from 2,400 M-1 s-1 for the most active candidate, NagK, to 
15 M-1 s-1 for the least active candidate, AlsK. To investigate the relationship 
between catalytic activities of promiscuous enzymes and their recruitment, we 
performed adaptive evolution of a glucokinase-deficient E. coli strain to 
restore glycolytic metabolism. We observed preferential recruitment of NanK via 
a trajectory involving early mutations that facilitate glucose uptake and 
amplify nanK transcription, followed by nonsynonymous substitutions in NanK that 
enhance the enzyme's promiscuous glucokinase activity. These substitutions 
reduced the native activity of NanK and reduced organismal fitness during growth 
on an N-acetylated carbon source, indicating that enzyme recruitment comes at a 
cost for growth on other substrates. Notably, the two most active candidates, 
NagK and Mak, were not recruited, suggesting that catalytic activity alone does 
not dictate evolutionary outcomes. The results highlight our lack of knowledge 
regarding biological drivers of enzyme recruitment and emphasize the need for a 
systems-wide approach to identify factors facilitating or constraining this 
important adaptive process.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad202
PMCID: PMC10519446
PMID: 37708398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):msad203. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad203.

New Evolutionary Insights into RpoA: A Novel Quorum Sensing Reprograming Factor 
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Cai W(1)(2), Liao H(1)(2), Lu M(1)(2), Zhou X(1)(2), Cheng X(1)(2), Staehelin 
C(3), Dai W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, South China Agricultural 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)College of Plant Protection, Integrative Microbiology Research Center, South 
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol and Guangdong Key Laboratory of Plant 
Resources, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Quorum-sensing (QS) coordinates the expression of virulence factors in 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen known for causing severe 
infections in immunocompromised patients. QS has a master regulator, the lasR 
gene, but in clinical settings, P. aeruginosa isolates have been found that are 
QS-active but LasR-null. In this study, we developed an experimental 
evolutionary approach to identify additional QS-reprogramming determinants. We 
began the study with a LasR-null mutant with an extra copy of mexT, a 
transcriptional regulator gene that is known to be able to reprogram QS in 
laboratory LasR-null strains. In this strain, spontaneous single mexT mutations 
are expected to have no or little phenotypic consequences. Using this novel 
method, which we have named "targeted gene duplication followed by mutant 
screening", we identified QS-active revertants with mutations in genes other 
than mexT. One QS-active revertant had a point mutation in rpoA, a gene encoding 
the α-subunit of RNA polymerase. QS activation in this mutant was found to be 
associated with the downregulated expression of mexEF-oprN efflux pump genes. 
Our study therefore uncovers a new functional role for RpoA in regulating QS 
activity. Our results indicate that a RpoA-dependent regulatory circuit 
controlling the expression of the mexEF-oprN operon is critical for 
QS-reprogramming. In conclusion, our study reports on the identification of 
non-MexT proteins associated with QS-reprogramming in a laboratory strain, 
shedding light on possible QS activation mechanisms in clinical P. aeruginosa 
isolates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad203
PMCID: PMC10566545
PMID: 37708386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad204. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad204.

Intra- vs. Interhost Evolution of SARS-CoV-2 Driven by Uncorrelated 
Selection-The Evolution Thwarted.

Hou M(1), Shi J(2), Gong Z(1), Wen H(1), Lan Y(2), Deng X(2), Fan Q(2), Li J(2), 
Jiang M(2), Tang X(2), Wu CI(1), Li F(2), Ruan Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangzhou Eighth People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.

In viral evolution, a new mutation has to proliferate within the host (Stage I) 
in order to be transmitted and then compete in the host population (Stage II). 
We now analyze the intrahost single nucleotide variants (iSNVs) in a set of 79 
SARS-CoV-2 infected patients with most transmissions tracked. Here, every 
mutation has two measures: 1) iSNV frequency within each individual host in 
Stage I; 2) occurrence among individuals ranging from 1 (private), 2-78 
(public), to 79 (global) occurrences in Stage II. In Stage I, a small fraction 
of nonsynonymous iSNVs are sufficiently advantageous to rise to a high 
frequency, often 100%. However, such iSNVs usually fail to become public 
mutations. Thus, the selective forces in the two stages of evolution are 
uncorrelated and, possibly, antagonistic. For that reason, successful mutants, 
including many variants of concern, have to avoid being eliminated in Stage I 
when they first emerge. As a result, they may not have the transmission 
advantage to outcompete the dominant strains and, hence, are rare in the host 
population. Few of them could manage to slowly accumulate advantageous mutations 
to compete in Stage II. When they do, they would appear suddenly as in each of 
the six successive waves of SARS-CoV-2 strains. In conclusion, Stage I 
evolution, the gate-keeper, may contravene the long-term viral evolution and 
should be heeded in viral studies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad204
PMCID: PMC10521905
PMID: 37707487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. Authors declare 
that they have no competing interests.


185. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad199. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad199.

Interploidy Introgression Shaped Adaptation during the Origin and Domestication 
History of Brassica napus.

Wang T(1)(2)(3)(4), van Dijk ADJ(4), Bucher J(3), Liang J(1)(2), Wu J(1)(2), 
Bonnema G(2)(3), Wang X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Vegetable Biobreeding, Institute of Vegetables and 
Flowers, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Sino-Dutch Joint Laboratory of Horticultural Genomics, Institute of 
Vegetables and Flowers, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Plant Breeding, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Bioinformatics Group, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.

Polyploidy is recurrent across the tree of life and known as an evolutionary 
driving force in plant diversification and crop domestication. How polyploid 
plants adapt to various habitats has been a fundamental question that remained 
largely unanswered. Brassica napus is a major crop cultivated worldwide, 
resulting from allopolyploidy between unknown accessions of diploid B. rapa and 
B. oleracea. Here, we used whole-genome resequencing data of accessions 
representing the majority of morphotypes and ecotypes from the species B. rapa, 
B. oleracea, and B. napus to investigate the role of polyploidy during 
domestication. To do so, we first reconstructed the phylogenetic history of B. 
napus, which supported the hypothesis that the emergence of B. napus derived 
from the hybridization of European turnip of B. rapa and wild B. oleracea. These 
analyses also showed that morphotypes of swede and Siberian kale (used as 
vegetable and fodder) were domesticated before rapeseed (oil crop). We next 
observed that frequent interploidy introgressions from sympatric diploids were 
prominent throughout the domestication history of B. napus. Introgressed genomic 
regions were shown to increase the overall genetic diversity and tend to be 
localized in regions of high recombination. We detected numerous candidate 
adaptive introgressed regions and found evidence that some of the genes in these 
regions contributed to phenotypic diversification and adaptation of different 
morphotypes. Overall, our results shed light on the origin and domestication of 
B. napus and demonstrate interploidy introgression as an important mechanism 
that fuels rapid diversification in polyploid species.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad199
PMCID: PMC10504873
PMID: 37707440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad200. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad200.

Cysteine Enrichment Mediates Co-Option of Uricase in Reptilian Skin and 
Transition to Uricotelism.

Mori G(1), Liuzzi A(1), Ronda L(2), Di Palma M(3), Chegkazi MS(4), Bui S(4), 
Garcia-Maya M(4), Ragazzini J(1), Malatesta M(1), Della Monica E(1), Rivetti 
C(1), Antin PB(5), Bettati S(2), Steiner RA(3)(4), Percudani R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences and Environmental Sustainability, 
University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(4)Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(5)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
USA.

Uric acid is the main means of nitrogen excretion in uricotelic vertebrates 
(birds and reptiles) and the end product of purine catabolism in humans and a 
few other mammals. While uricase is inactivated in mammals unable to degrade 
urate, the presence of orthologous genes without inactivating mutations in avian 
and reptilian genomes is unexplained. Here we show that the Gallus gallus gene 
we name cysteine-rich urate oxidase (CRUOX) encodes a functional protein 
representing a unique case of cysteine enrichment in the evolution of vertebrate 
orthologous genes. CRUOX retains the ability to catalyze urate oxidation to 
hydrogen peroxide and 5-hydroxyisourate (HIU), albeit with a 100-fold reduced 
efficiency. However, differently from all uricases hitherto characterized, it 
can also facilitate urate regeneration from HIU, a catalytic property that we 
propose depends on its enrichment in cysteine residues. X-ray structural 
analysis highlights differences in the active site compared to known orthologs 
and suggests a mechanism for cysteine-mediated self-aggregation under 
H2O2-oxidative conditions. Cysteine enrichment was concurrent with the 
transition to uricotelism and a shift in gene expression from the liver to the 
skin where CRUOX is co-expressed with β-keratins. Therefore, the loss of urate 
degradation in amniotes has followed opposite evolutionary trajectories: while 
uricase has been eliminated by pseudogenization in some mammals, it has been 
repurposed as a redox-sensitive enzyme in the reptilian skin.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad200
PMCID: PMC10517255
PMID: 37695804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad198. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad198.

Interlocus Gene Conversion, Natural Selection, and Paralog Homogenization.

Yang Y(1), Xu T(1)(2), Conant G(1)(3), Kishino H(4), Thorne JL(1)(2)(3), Ji 
X(5).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 
USA.
(2)Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, USA.
(4)AI/Data Science Social Implementation Laboratory, Chuo University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Mathematics, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Following a duplication, the resulting paralogs tend to diverge. While mutation 
and natural selection can accelerate this process, they can also slow it. Here, 
we quantify the paralog homogenization that is caused by point mutations and 
interlocus gene conversion (IGC). Among 164 duplicated teleost genes, the median 
percentage of postduplication codon substitutions that arise from IGC rather 
than point mutation is estimated to be between 7% and 8%. By differentiating 
between the nonsynonymous codon substitutions that homogenize the protein 
sequences of paralogs and the nonhomogenizing nonsynonymous substitutions, we 
estimate the homogenizing nonsynonymous rates to be higher for 163 of the 164 
teleost data sets as well as for all 14 data sets of duplicated yeast ribosomal 
protein-coding genes that we consider. For all 14 yeast data sets, the estimated 
homogenizing nonsynonymous rates exceed the synonymous rates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad198
PMCID: PMC10503786
PMID: 37675606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad193. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad193.

Relaxation of Natural Selection in the Evolution of the Giant Lungfish Genomes.

Fuselli S(1), Greco S(2), Biello R(1), Palmitessa S(2), Lago M(1), Meneghetti 
C(1), McDougall C(3), Trucchi E(4), Rota Stabelli O(5)(6), Biscotti AM(4), 
Schmidt DJ(3), Roberts DT(7), Espinoza T(7), Hughes JM(3), Ometto L(8), Gerdol 
M(2), Bertorelle G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.
(3)Australian Rivers Institute, Griffith University, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Marche Polytechnic University, 
Ancona, Italy.
(5)Research and Innovation Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach, 38010 San Michele 
all'Adige, Italy.
(6)Center Agriculture Food Environment, University of Trento, 38010 San Michele 
all'Adige, Italy.
(7)Seqwater, Ipswich, 4305 Queensland, Australia.
(8)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Nonadaptive hypotheses on the evolution of eukaryotic genome size predict an 
expansion when the process of purifying selection becomes weak. Accordingly, 
species with huge genomes, such as lungfish, are expected to show a genome-wide 
relaxation signature of selection compared with other organisms. However, few 
studies have empirically tested this prediction using genomic data in a 
comparative framework. Here, we show that 1) the newly assembled transcriptome 
of the Australian lungfish, Neoceratodus forsteri, is characterized by an excess 
of pervasive transcription, or transcriptional leakage, possibly due to 
suboptimal transcriptional control, and 2) a significant relaxation signature in 
coding genes in lungfish species compared with other vertebrates. Based on these 
observations, we propose that the largest known animal genomes evolved in a 
nearly neutral scenario where genome expansion is less efficiently constrained.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad193
PMCID: PMC10503785
PMID: 37671664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad196. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad196.

Acute and Long-Term Consequences of Co-opted doublesex on the Development of 
Mimetic Butterfly Color Patterns.

VanKuren NW(1), Doellman MM(1), Sheikh SI(1), Palmer Droguett DH(1), Massardo 
D(1), Kronforst MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology & Evolution, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.

Novel phenotypes are increasingly recognized to have evolved by co-option of 
conserved genes into new developmental contexts, yet the process by which 
co-opted genes modify existing developmental programs remains obscure. Here, we 
provide insight into this process by characterizing the role of co-opted 
doublesex in butterfly wing color pattern development. dsx is the master 
regulator of insect sex differentiation but has been co-opted to control the 
switch between discrete nonmimetic and mimetic patterns in Papilio alphenor and 
its relatives through the evolution of novel mimetic alleles. We found dynamic 
spatial and temporal expression pattern differences between mimetic and 
nonmimetic butterflies throughout wing development. A mimetic color pattern 
program is switched on by a pulse of dsx expression in early pupal development 
that causes acute and long-term differential gene expression, particularly in 
Wnt and Hedgehog signaling pathways. RNAi suggested opposing, novel roles for 
these pathways in mimetic pattern development. Importantly, Dsx co-option caused 
Engrailed, a primary target of Hedgehog signaling, to gain a novel expression 
domain early in pupal wing development that is propagated through mid-pupal 
development to specify novel mimetic patterns despite becoming decoupled from 
Dsx expression itself. Altogether, our findings provide multiple views into how 
co-opted genes can both cause and elicit changes to conserved networks and 
pathways to result in development of novel, adaptive phenotypes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad196
PMCID: PMC10498343
PMID: 37668300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad195. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad195.

PhyloAcc-GT: A Bayesian Method for Inferring Patterns of Substitution Rate 
Shifts on Targeted Lineages Accounting for Gene Tree Discordance.

Yan H(1), Hu Z(1)(2), Thomas GWC(3), Edwards SV(4), Sackton TB(3), Liu JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Gladstone Institute of Data Science and Biotechnology, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(3)Informatics Group, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.

An important goal of evolutionary genomics is to identify genomic regions whose 
substitution rates differ among lineages. For example, genomic regions 
experiencing accelerated molecular evolution in some lineages may provide 
insight into links between genotype and phenotype. Several comparative genomics 
methods have been developed to identify genomic accelerations between species, 
including a Bayesian method called PhyloAcc, which models shifts in substitution 
rate in multiple target lineages on a phylogeny. However, few methods consider 
the possibility of discordance between the trees of individual loci and the 
species tree due to incomplete lineage sorting, which might cause false 
positives. Here, we present PhyloAcc-GT, which extends PhyloAcc by modeling gene 
tree heterogeneity. Given a species tree, we adopt the multispecies coalescent 
model as the prior distribution of gene trees, use Markov chain Monte Carlo 
(MCMC) for inference, and design novel MCMC moves to sample gene trees 
efficiently. Through extensive simulations, we show that PhyloAcc-GT outperforms 
PhyloAcc and other methods in identifying target lineage-specific accelerations 
and detecting complex patterns of rate shifts, and is robust to specification of 
population size parameters. PhyloAcc-GT is usually more conservative than 
PhyloAcc in calling convergent rate shifts because it identifies more 
accelerations on ancestral than on terminal branches. We apply PhyloAcc-GT to 
two examples of convergent evolution: flightlessness in ratites and marine 
mammal adaptations, and show that PhyloAcc-GT is a robust tool to identify 
shifts in substitution rate associated with specific target lineages while 
accounting for incomplete lineage sorting.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad195
PMCID: PMC10540510
PMID: 37665177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad191. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad191.

On the Origins of Phenotypic Parallelism in Benthic and Limnetic Stickleback.

Dean LL(1), Magalhaes IS(1)(2), D'Agostino D(1)(3), Hohenlohe P(4), MacColl 
ADC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, The University of Nottingham, University Park, 
Nottingham, UK.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, School of Health and Life Sciences, Whitelands 
College, University of Roehampton, London, UK.
(3)Water Research Center, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab 
Emirates.
(4)Institute for Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Studies, Department of 
Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, USA.

Rapid evolution of similar phenotypes in similar environments, giving rise to in 
situ parallel adaptation, is an important hallmark of ecological speciation. 
However, what appears to be in situ adaptation can also arise by dispersal of 
divergent lineages from elsewhere. We test whether two contrasting phenotypes 
repeatedly evolved in parallel, or have a single origin, in an archetypal 
example of ecological adaptive radiation: benthic-limnetic three-spined 
stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus) across species pair and solitary lakes in 
British Columbia. We identify two genomic clusters across freshwater 
populations, which differ in benthic-limnetic divergent phenotypic traits and 
separate benthic from limnetic individuals in species pair lakes. Phylogenetic 
reconstruction and niche evolution modeling both suggest a single evolutionary 
origin for each of these clusters. We detected strong phylogenetic signal in 
benthic-limnetic divergent traits, suggesting that they are ancestrally 
retained. Accounting for ancestral state retention, we identify local adaptation 
of body armor due to the presence of an intraguild predator, the sculpin (Cottus 
asper), and environmental effects of lake depth and pH on body size. Taken 
together, our results imply a predominant role for retention of ancestral 
characteristics in driving trait distribution, with further selection imposed on 
some traits by environmental factors.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad191
PMCID: PMC10490448
PMID: 37652053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad194. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad194.

Updated Phylogeny and Protein Structure Predictions Revise the Hypothesis on the 
Origin of MADS-box Transcription Factors in Land Plants.

Qiu Y(1)(2), Li Z(3)(4), Walther D(1), Köhler C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Potsdam-Golm, Germany.
(2)Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences & Linnean Center for Plant 
Biology, Uppsala BioCenter, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(4)VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.

MADS-box transcription factors (TFs), among the first TFs extensively studied, 
exhibit a wide distribution across eukaryotes and play diverse functional roles. 
Varying by domain architecture, MADS-box TFs in land plants are categorized into 
Type I (M-type) and Type II (MIKC-type). Type I and II genes have been 
considered orthologous to the SRF and MEF2 genes in animals, respectively, 
presumably originating from a duplication before the divergence of eukaryotes. 
Here, we exploited the increasing availability of eukaryotic MADS-box sequences 
and reassessed their evolution. While supporting the ancient duplication giving 
rise to SRF- and MEF2-types, we found that Type I and II genes originated from 
the MEF2-type genes through another duplication in the most recent common 
ancestor (MRCA) of land plants. Protein structures predicted by AlphaFold2 and 
OmegaFold support our phylogenetic analyses, with plant Type I and II TFs 
resembling the MEF2-type structure, rather than SRFs. We hypothesize that the 
ancestral SRF-type TFs were lost in the MRCA of Archaeplastida (the kingdom 
Plantae sensu lato). The retained MEF2-type TFs acquired a Keratin-like domain 
and became MIKC-type before the divergence of Streptophyta. Subsequently in the 
MRCA of land plants, M-type TFs evolved from a duplicated MIKC-type precursor 
through loss of the Keratin-like domain, leading to the Type I clade. Both Type 
I and II TFs expanded and functionally differentiated in concert with the 
increasing complexity of land plant body architecture. The recruitment of these 
originally stress-responsive TFs into developmental programs, including those 
underlying reproduction, may have facilitated the adaptation to the terrestrial 
environment.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad194
PMCID: PMC10484287
PMID: 37652031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad192. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad192.

De Novo Mutation Rates in Sticklebacks.

Zhang C(1), Reid K(1), Sands AF(1), Fraimout A(1)(2), Schierup MH(3), Merilä 
J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Area of Ecology & Biodiversity, School of Biological Sciences, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR.
(2)Research Program in Organismal & Evolutionary Biology, Faculty Biological and 
Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Bioinformatics Research Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

Mutation rate is a fundamental parameter in population genetics. Apart from 
being an important scaling parameter for demographic and phylogenetic inference, 
it allows one to understand at what rate new genetic diversity is generated and 
what the expected level of genetic diversity is in a population at equilibrium. 
However, except for well-established model organisms, accurate estimates of de 
novo mutation rates are available for a very limited number of organisms from 
the wild. We estimated mutation rates (µ) in two marine populations of the 
nine-spined stickleback (Pungitius pungitius) with the aid of several 2- and 
3-generational family pedigrees, deep (>50×) whole-genome resequences and a 
high-quality reference genome. After stringent filtering, we discovered 308 
germline mutations in 106 offspring translating to µ = 4.83 × 10-9 and µ = 4.29 
× 10-9 per base per generation in the two populations, respectively. Up to 20% 
of the mutations were shared by full-sibs showing that the level of parental 
mosaicism was relatively high. Since the estimated µ was 3.1 times smaller than 
the commonly used substitution rate, recalibration with µ led to substantial 
increase in estimated divergence times between different stickleback species. 
Our estimates of the de novo mutation rate should provide a useful resource for 
research focused on fish population genetics and that of sticklebacks in 
particular.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad192
PMCID: PMC10503787
PMID: 37648662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad189. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad189.

Growth-dependent Gene Expression Variation Influences the Strength of Codon 
Usage Biases.

Johnson MM(1), Hockenberry AJ(1), McGuffie MJ(2), Vieira LC(1), Wilke CO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
TX, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Systems and Synthetic 
Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jul 13;:

The most highly expressed genes in microbial genomes tend to use a limited set 
of synonymous codons, often referred to as "preferred codons." The existence of 
preferred codons is commonly attributed to selection pressures on various 
aspects of protein translation including accuracy and/or speed. However, gene 
expression is condition-dependent and even within single-celled organisms 
transcript and protein abundances can vary depending on a variety of 
environmental and other factors. Here, we show that growth rate-dependent 
expression variation is an important constraint that significantly influences 
the evolution of gene sequences. Using large-scale transcriptomic and proteomic 
data sets in Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we confirm that 
codon usage biases are strongly associated with gene expression but highlight 
that this relationship is most pronounced when gene expression measurements are 
taken during rapid growth conditions. Specifically, genes whose relative 
expression increases during periods of rapid growth have stronger codon usage 
biases than comparably expressed genes whose expression decreases during rapid 
growth conditions. These findings highlight that gene expression measured in any 
particular condition tells only part of the story regarding the forces shaping 
the evolution of microbial gene sequences. More generally, our results imply 
that microbial physiology during rapid growth is critical for explaining 
long-term translational constraints.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad189
PMCID: PMC10482319
PMID: 37619989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad187. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad187.

The Architecture of Metabolic Networks Constrains the Evolution of Microbial 
Resource Hierarchies.

Takano S(1)(2)(3), Vila JCC(1)(2)(4), Miyazaki R(3)(5), Sánchez Á(1)(2)(6), 
Bajić D(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(2)Microbial Sciences Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Bioproduction Research Institute, National Institute of Advanced Industrial 
Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Japan.
(4)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(5)Computational Bio Big Data Open Innovation Laboratory (CBBD-OIL), AIST, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Microbial Biotechnology, CNB-CSIC, Campus de Cantoblanco, 
Madrid, Spain.
(7)Section of Industrial Microbiology, Department of Biotechnology, Technical 
University Delft, Delft, The Netherlands.

Microbial strategies for resource use are an essential determinant of their 
fitness in complex habitats. When facing environments with multiple nutrients, 
microbes often use them sequentially according to a preference hierarchy, 
resulting in well-known patterns of diauxic growth. In theory, the evolutionary 
diversification of metabolic hierarchies could represent a mechanism supporting 
coexistence and biodiversity by enabling temporal segregation of niches. Despite 
this ecologically critical role, the extent to which substrate preference 
hierarchies can evolve and diversify remains largely unexplored. Here, we used 
genome-scale metabolic modeling to systematically explore the evolution of 
metabolic hierarchies across a vast space of metabolic network genotypes. We 
find that only a limited number of metabolic hierarchies can readily evolve, 
corresponding to the most commonly observed hierarchies in genome-derived 
models. We further show how the evolution of novel hierarchies is constrained by 
the architecture of central metabolism, which determines both the propensity to 
change ranks between pairs of substrates and the effect of specific reactions on 
hierarchy evolution. Our analysis sheds light on the genetic and mechanistic 
determinants of microbial metabolic hierarchies, opening new research avenues to 
understand their evolution, evolvability, and ecology.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad187
PMCID: PMC10476156
PMID: 37619982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad185. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad185.

Genetic Architecture of Flowering Time Differs Between Populations With 
Contrasting Demographic and Selective Histories.

Neto C(1), Hancock A(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Basis of Adaptation Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Plant 
Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany.

Understanding the evolutionary factors that impact the genetic architecture of 
traits is a central goal of evolutionary genetics. Here, we investigate how 
quantitative trait variation accumulated over time in populations that colonized 
a novel environment. We compare the genetic architecture of flowering time in 
Arabidopsis populations from the drought-prone Cape Verde Islands and their 
closest outgroup population from North Africa. We find that trait polygenicity 
is severely reduced in the island populations compared to the continental North 
African population. Further, trait architectures and reconstructed allelic 
histories best fit a model of strong directional selection in the islands in 
accord with a Fisher-Orr adaptive walk. Consistent with this, we find that 
large-effect variants that disrupt major flowering time genes (FRI and FLC) 
arose first, followed by smaller effect variants, including ATX2 L125F, which is 
associated with a 4-day reduction in flowering time. The most recently arising 
flowering time-associated loci are not known to be directly involved in 
flowering time, consistent with an omnigenic signature developing as the 
population approaches its trait optimum. Surprisingly, we find no effect in the 
natural population of EDI-Cvi-0 (CRY2 V367M), an allele for which an effect was 
previously validated by introgression into a Eurasian line. Instead, our results 
suggest the previously observed effect of the EDI-Cvi-0 allele on flowering time 
likely depends on genetic background, due to an epistatic interaction. 
Altogether, our results provide an empirical example of the effects demographic 
history and selection has on trait architecture.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad185
PMCID: PMC10461413
PMID: 37603463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad186. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad186.

Horizontally Transferred DNA in the Genome of the Fungus Pyricularia oryzae is 
Associated With Repressive Histone Modifications.

Kobayashi N(1), Dang TA(1), Pham KTM(1)(2), Gómez Luciano LB(3)(4), Van Vu B(1), 
Izumitsu K(5), Shimizu M(6), Ikeda KI(1), Li WH(3)(7), Nakayashiki H(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(5)Graduate School of Environmental Science, The University of Shiga Prefecture, 
Hikone, Japan.
(6)Department of Genomics and Breeding, Iwate Biotechnology Research Center, 
Kitakami, Japan.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is a means of exchanging genetic material 
asexually. The process by which horizontally transferred genes are domesticated 
by the host genome is of great interest but is not well understood. In this 
study, we determined the telomere-to-telomere genome sequence of the 
wheat-infecting Pyricularia oryzae strain Br48. SNP analysis indicated that the 
Br48 strain is a hybrid of wheat- and Brachiaria-infecting strains by a sexual 
or parasexual cross. Comparative genomic analysis identified several 
megabase-scale "insertions" in the Br48 genome, some of which were possibly 
gained by HGT-related events from related species, such as P. pennisetigena or 
P. grisea. Notably, the mega-insertions often contained genes whose phylogeny is 
not congruent with the species phylogeny. Moreover, some of the genes have a 
close homolog even in distantly related organisms, such as basidiomycetes or 
prokaryotes, implying the involvement of multiple HGT events. Interestingly, the 
levels of the silent epigenetic marks H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 in a genomic region 
tended to be negatively correlated with the phylogenetic concordance of genes in 
the same region, suggesting that horizontally transferred DNA is preferentially 
targeted for epigenetic silencing. Indeed, the putative HGT-derived genes were 
activated when MoKmt6, the gene responsible for H3K27me3 modification, was 
deleted. Notably, these genes also tended to be up-regulated during infection, 
suggesting that they are now under host control and have contributed to 
establishing a fungal niche. In conclusion, this study suggests that epigenetic 
modifications have played an important role in the domestication of HGT-derived 
genes in the P. oryzae genome.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad186
PMCID: PMC10473863
PMID: 37595132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad184. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad184.

Comparative Genomic Analysis Identifies Great-Ape-Specific Structural Variants 
and Their Evolutionary Relevance.

Zhou B(1)(2)(3), He Y(1)(2), Chen Y(1)(2)(3), Su B(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)National Resource Center for Non-Human Primates, Kunming Primate Research 
Center, and National Research Facility for Phenotypic & Genetic Analysis of 
Model Animals (Primate Facility), Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(3)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

During the origin of great apes about 14 million years ago, a series of 
phenotypic innovations emerged, such as the increased body size, the enlarged 
brain volume, the improved cognitive skill, and the diversified diet. Yet, the 
genomic basis of these evolutionary changes remains unclear. Utilizing the 
high-quality genome assemblies of great apes (including human), gibbon, and 
macaque, we conducted comparative genome analyses and identified 15,885 great 
ape-specific structural variants (GSSVs), including eight coding GSSVs resulting 
in the creation of novel proteins (e.g., ACAN and CMYA5). Functional annotations 
of the GSSV-related genes revealed the enrichment of genes involved in 
development and morphogenesis, especially neurogenesis and neural network 
formation, suggesting the potential role of GSSVs in shaping the great 
ape-shared traits. Further dissection of the brain-related GSSVs shows great 
ape-specific changes of enhancer activities and gene expression in the brain, 
involving a group of GSSV-regulated genes (such as NOL3) that potentially 
contribute to the altered brain development and function in great apes. The 
presented data highlight the evolutionary role of structural variants in the 
phenotypic innovations during the origin of the great ape lineage.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad184
PMCID: PMC10461412
PMID: 37565562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad183. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad183.

Strong Purifying Selection in Haploid Tissue-Specific Genes of Scots Pine 
Supports the Masking Theory.

Cervantes S(1)(2), Kesälahti R(1), Kumpula TA(2)(3), Mattila TM(4), Helanterä 
H(1), Pyhäjärvi T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(2)Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(3)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics and Tumor Biology, Research Unit of 
Translational Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(4)Human Evolution, Department of Organismal Biology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Forest Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

The masking theory states that genes expressed in a haploid stage will be under 
more efficient selection. In contrast, selection will be less efficient in genes 
expressed in a diploid stage, where the fitness effects of recessive deleterious 
or beneficial mutations can be hidden from selection in heterozygous form. This 
difference can influence several evolutionary processes such as the maintenance 
of genetic variation, adaptation rate, and genetic load. Masking theory 
expectations have been confirmed in single-cell haploid and diploid organisms. 
However, in multicellular organisms, such as plants, the effects of haploid 
selection are not clear-cut. In plants, the great majority of studies indicating 
haploid selection have been carried out using male haploid tissues in 
angiosperms. Hence, evidence in these systems is confounded with the effects of 
sexual selection and intraspecific competition. Evidence from other plant groups 
is scarce, and results show no support for the masking theory. Here, we have 
used a gymnosperm Scots pine megagametophyte, a maternally derived seed haploid 
tissue, and four diploid tissues to test the strength of purifying selection on 
a set of genes with tissue-specific expression. By using targeted resequencing 
data of those genes, we obtained estimates of genetic diversity, the site 
frequency spectrum of 0-fold and 4-fold sites, and inferred the distribution of 
fitness effects of new mutations in haploid and diploid tissue-specific genes. 
Our results show that purifying selection is stronger for tissue-specific genes 
expressed in the haploid megagametophyte tissue and that this signal of strong 
selection is not an artifact driven by high expression levels.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad183
PMCID: PMC10457172
PMID: 37565532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad182. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad182.

Interdisciplinary Analyses of Bronze Age Communities from Western Hungary Reveal 
Complex Population Histories.

Gerber D(1)(2)(3), Szeifert B(1)(2)(3), Székely O(1), Egyed B(2), Gyuris 
B(1)(2)(3), Giblin JI(4), Horváth A(5), Köhler K(6), Kulcsár G(6), Kustár Á(7), 
Major I(5), Molnár M(5), Palcsu L(5), Szeverényi V(8), Fábián S(9), Mende BG(1), 
Bondár M(6), Ari E(2)(10)(11), Kiss V(6), Szécsényi-Nagy A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Archaeogenomics, Research Centre for the Humanities, Eötvös 
Loránd Research Network (ELKH), Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Genetics, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary.
(3)Doctoral School of Biology, Institute of Biology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Quinnipiac University, Hamden, CT, 
USA.
(5)Isotope Climatology and Environmental Research (ICER) Centre, Institute for 
Nuclear Research, Debrecen, Hungary.
(6)Institute of Archaeology, Research Centre for the Humanities, Eötvös Loránd 
Research Network (ELKH), Budapest, Hungary.
(7)Freelancer anthropologist, Budapest, Hungary.
(8)Department of Archaeology, Déri Museum, Debrecen, Hungary.
(9)Hungarian National Museum, Budapest, Hungary.
(10)HCEMM-BRC Metabolic Systems Biology Lab, Szeged, Hungary.
(11)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological 
Research Centre, Eötvös Loránd Research Network (ELKH), Szeged, Hungary.

In this study, we report 21 ancient shotgun genomes from present-day Western 
Hungary, from previously understudied Late Copper Age Baden, and Bronze Age 
Somogyvár-Vinkovci, Kisapostag, and Encrusted Pottery archeological cultures 
(3,530-1,620 cal Bce). Our results indicate the presence of high steppe ancestry 
in the Somogyvár-Vinkovci culture. They were then replaced by the Kisapostag 
group, who exhibit an outstandingly high (up to ∼47%) Mesolithic hunter-gatherer 
ancestry, despite this component being thought to be highly diluted by the time 
of the Early Bronze Age. The Kisapostag population contributed the genetic basis 
for the succeeding community of the Encrusted Pottery culture. We also found an 
elevated hunter-gatherer component in a local Baden culture-associated 
individual, but no connections were proven to the Bronze Age individuals. The 
hunter-gatherer ancestry in Kisapostag is likely derived from two main sources, 
one from a Funnelbeaker or Globular Amphora culture-related population and one 
from a previously unrecognized source in Eastern Europe. We show that this 
ancestry not only appeared in various groups in Bronze Age Central Europe but 
also made contributions to Baltic populations. The social structure of 
Kisapostag and Encrusted Pottery cultures is patrilocal, similarly to most 
contemporaneous groups. Furthermore, we developed new methods and method 
standards for computational analyses of ancient DNA, implemented to our newly 
developed and freely available bioinformatic package. By analyzing clinical 
traits, we found carriers of aneuploidy and inheritable genetic diseases. 
Finally, based on genetic and anthropological data, we present here the first 
female facial reconstruction from the Bronze Age Carpathian Basin.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad182
PMCID: PMC10473862
PMID: 37562011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad181. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad181.

Evolution of Human Brain Left-Right Asymmetry: Old Genes with New Functions.

Wang J(1), Ma S(1), Yu P(1), He X.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, China.

The human brain is generally anatomically symmetrical, boasting mirror-like 
brain regions in the left and right hemispheres. Despite this symmetry, 
fine-scale structural asymmetries are prevalent and are believed to be 
responsible for distinct functional divisions within the brain. Prior studies 
propose that these asymmetric structures are predominantly primate specific or 
even unique to humans, suggesting that the genes contributing to the structural 
asymmetry of the human brain might have evolved recently. In our study, we 
identified approximately 1,500 traits associated with human brain asymmetry by 
collecting paired brain magnetic resonance imaging features from the UK Biobank. 
Each trait is measured in a specific region of one hemisphere and mirrored in 
the corresponding region of the other hemisphere. Conducting genome-wide 
association studies on these traits, we identified over 1,000 quantitative trait 
loci. Around these index single nucleotide polymorphisms, we found approximately 
200 genes that are enriched in brain-related Gene Ontology terms and are 
predominantly upregulated in brain tissues. Interestingly, most of these genes 
are evolutionarily old, originating just prior to the emergence of Bilateria 
(bilaterally symmetrical animals) and Euteleostomi (bony vertebrates with a 
brain), at a significantly higher ratio than expected. Further analyses of these 
genes reveal a brain-specific upregulation in humans relative to other mammalian 
species. This suggests that the structural asymmetry of the human brain has been 
shaped by evolutionarily ancient genes that have assumed new functions over 
time.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad181
PMCID: PMC10473864
PMID: 37561991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):msad180. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad180.

Historic Sampling of a Vanishing Beast: Population Structure and Diversity in 
the Black Rhinoceros.

Sánchez-Barreiro F(1), De Cahsan B(1), Westbury MV(1), Sun X(1), Margaryan A(1), 
Fontsere C(1)(2), Bruford MW(3), Russo IM(3), Kalthoff DC(4), Sicheritz-Pontén 
T(1)(5), Petersen B(1)(5), Dalén L(6)(7), Zhang G(8)(9)(10)(11), Marquès-Bonet 
T(2)(12)(13), Gilbert MTP(1)(14), Moodley Y(15).

Author information:
(1)Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas-Universitat Pompeu Fabra), Barcelona Biomedical Research Park, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(4)Department of Zoology, Swedish Museum of Natural History, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Centre of Excellence for Omics-Driven Computational Biodiscovery (COMBio), 
Faculty of Applied Sciences, AIMST University, Kedah, Malaysia.
(6)Department of Zoology, Centre for Palaeogenetics, Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Bioinformatics and Genetics, Swedish Museum of Natural History, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Section for Ecology and Evolution, Department of Biology, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, People's Republic of China.
(10)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, People's Republic of China.
(11)BGI Research, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.
(12)National Centre for Genomic Analysis-Centre for Genomic Regulation, 
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Life & Medical Sciences, Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats 
(ICREA), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(14)Department of Natural History, NTNU University Museum, Trondheim, Norway.
(15)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Venda, Thohoyandou, 
Republic of South Africa.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2024 Feb 1;41(2):

The black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis L.) is a critically endangered species 
historically distributed across sub-Saharan Africa. Hunting and habitat 
disturbance have diminished both its numbers and distribution since the 19th 
century, but a poaching crisis in the late 20th century drove them to the brink 
of extinction. Genetic and genomic assessments can greatly increase our 
knowledge of the species and inform management strategies. However, when a 
species has been severely reduced, with the extirpation and artificial admixture 
of several populations, it is extremely challenging to obtain an accurate 
understanding of historic population structure and evolutionary history from 
extant samples. Therefore, we generated and analyzed whole genomes from 63 black 
rhinoceros museum specimens collected between 1775 and 1981. Results showed that 
the black rhinoceros could be genetically structured into six major historic 
populations (Central Africa, East Africa, Northwestern Africa, Northeastern 
Africa, Ruvuma, and Southern Africa) within which were nested four further 
subpopulations (Maasailand, southwestern, eastern rift, and northern rift), 
largely mirroring geography, with a punctuated north-south cline. However, we 
detected varying degrees of admixture among groups and found that several 
geographical barriers, most prominently the Zambezi River, drove population 
discontinuities. Genomic diversity was high in the middle of the range and 
decayed toward the periphery. This comprehensive historic portrait also allowed 
us to ascertain the ancestry of 20 resequenced genomes from extant populations. 
Lastly, using insights gained from this unique temporal data set, we suggest 
management strategies, some of which require urgent implementation, for the 
conservation of the remaining black rhinoceros diversity.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad180
PMCID: PMC10500089
PMID: 37561011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad179. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad179.

Developmental Selection and the Perception of Mutation Bias.

Majic P(1)(2), Payne JL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The notion that mutations are random relative to their fitness effects is 
central to the Neo-Darwinian view of evolution. However, a recent interpretation 
of the patterns of mutation accumulation in the genome of Arabidopsis thaliana 
has challenged this notion, arguing for the presence of a targeted DNA repair 
mechanism that causes a nonrandom association of mutation rates and fitness 
effects. Specifically, this mechanism was suggested to cause a reduction in the 
rates of mutations on essential genes, thus lowering the rates of deleterious 
mutations. Central to this argument were attempts to rule out selection at the 
population level. Here, we offer an alternative and parsimonious interpretation 
of the patterns of mutation accumulation previously attributed to mutation bias, 
showing how they can instead or additionally be caused by developmental 
selection, that is selection occurring at the cellular level during the 
development of a multicellular organism. Thus, the depletion of deleterious 
mutations in A. thaliana may indeed be the result of a selective process, rather 
than a bias in mutation. More broadly, our work highlights the importance of 
considering development in the interpretation of population-genetic analyses of 
multicellular organisms, and it emphasizes that efforts to identify mechanisms 
involved in mutational biases should explicitly account for developmental 
selection.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad179
PMCID: PMC10443735
PMID: 37556606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad177. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad177.

Genetic Incompatibilities and Evolutionary Rescue by Wild Relatives Shaped Grain 
Amaranth Domestication.

Gonçalves-Dias J(1), Singh A(1), Graf C(1), Stetter MG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Plant Sciences, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Cluster of Excellence on Plant Sciences (CEPLAS), University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.

Crop domestication and the subsequent expansion of crops have long been thought 
of as a linear process from a wild ancestor to a domesticate. However, evidence 
of gene flow from locally adapted wild relatives that provided adaptive alleles 
into crops has been identified in multiple species. Yet, little is known about 
the evolutionary consequences of gene flow during domestication and the 
interaction of gene flow and genetic load in crop populations. We study the 
pseudo-cereal grain amaranth that has been domesticated three times in different 
geographic regions of the Americas. We quantify the amount and distribution of 
gene flow and genetic load along the genome of the three grain amaranth species 
and their two wild relatives. Our results show ample gene flow between crop 
species and between crops and their wild relatives. Gene flow from wild 
relatives decreased genetic load in the three crop species. This suggests that 
wild relatives could provide evolutionary rescue by replacing deleterious 
alleles in crops. We assess experimental hybrids between the three crop species 
and found genetic incompatibilities between one Central American grain amaranth 
and the other two crop species. These incompatibilities might have created 
recent reproductive barriers and maintained species integrity today. Together, 
our results show that gene flow played an important role in the domestication 
and expansion of grain amaranth, despite genetic species barriers. The 
domestication of plants was likely not linear and created a genomic mosaic by 
multiple contributors with varying fitness effects for today's crops.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad177
PMCID: PMC10439364
PMID: 37552934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad178. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad178.

Inferring the Direction of Introgression Using Genomic Sequence Data.

Thawornwattana Y(1), Huang J(2), Flouri T(3), Mallet J(1)(3), Yang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
(2)School of Biomedical Engineering, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, 
P.R. China.
(3)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Genomic data are informative about the history of species divergence and 
interspecific gene flow, including the direction, timing, and strength of gene 
flow. However, gene flow in opposite directions generates similar patterns in 
multilocus sequence data, such as reduced sequence divergence between the 
hybridizing species. As a result, inference of the direction of gene flow is 
challenging. Here, we investigate the information about the direction of gene 
flow present in genomic sequence data using likelihood-based methods under the 
multispecies-coalescent-with-introgression model. We analyze the case of two 
species, and use simulation to examine cases with three or four species. We find 
that it is easier to infer gene flow from a small population to a large one than 
in the opposite direction, and easier to infer inflow (gene flow from outgroup 
species to an ingroup species) than outflow (gene flow from an ingroup species 
to an outgroup species). It is also easier to infer gene flow if there is a 
longer time of separate evolution between the initial divergence and subsequent 
introgression. When introgression is assumed to occur in the wrong direction, 
the time of introgression tends to be correctly estimated and the Bayesian test 
of gene flow is often significant, while estimates of introgression probability 
can be even greater than the true probability. We analyze genomic sequences from 
Heliconius butterflies to demonstrate that typical genomic datasets are 
informative about the direction of interspecific gene flow, as well as its 
timing and strength.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad178
PMCID: PMC10439365
PMID: 37552932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad175. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad175.

Major Revisions in Pancrustacean Phylogeny and Evidence of Sensitivity to Taxon 
Sampling.

Bernot JP(1)(2), Owen CL(3), Wolfe JM(4), Meland K(5), Olesen J(6), Crandall 
KA(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Invertebrate Zoology, US National Museum of Natural History, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT, USA.
(3)Systematic Entomology Laboratory, USDA-ARS, ℅ National Museum of Natural 
History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)Museum of Comparative Zoology and Department of Organismic and Evolutionary 
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(6)Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(7)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Milken Institute School of 
Public Health, George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.

The clade Pancrustacea, comprising crustaceans and hexapods, is the most diverse 
group of animals on earth, containing over 80% of animal species and half of 
animal biomass. It has been the subject of several recent phylogenomic analyses, 
yet relationships within Pancrustacea show a notable lack of stability. Here, 
the phylogeny is estimated with expanded taxon sampling, particularly of 
malacostracans. We show small changes in taxon sampling have large impacts on 
phylogenetic estimation. By analyzing identical orthologs between two slightly 
different taxon sets, we show that the differences in the resulting topologies 
are due primarily to the effects of taxon sampling on the phylogenetic 
reconstruction method. We compare trees resulting from our phylogenomic analyses 
with those from the literature to explore the large tree space of pancrustacean 
phylogenetic hypotheses and find that statistical topology tests reject the 
previously published trees in favor of the maximum likelihood trees produced 
here. Our results reject several clades including Caridoida, Eucarida, 
Multicrustacea, Vericrustacea, and Syncarida. Notably, we find Copepoda nested 
within Allotriocarida with high support and recover a novel relationship between 
decapods, euphausiids, and syncarids that we refer to as the Syneucarida. With 
denser taxon sampling, we find Stomatopoda sister to this latter clade, which we 
collectively name Stomatocarida, dividing Malacostraca into three clades: 
Leptostraca, Peracarida, and Stomatocarida. A new Bayesian divergence time 
estimation is conducted using 13 vetted fossils. We review our results in the 
context of other pancrustacean phylogenetic hypotheses and highlight 15 key taxa 
to sample in future studies.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society for Molecular Biology 
and Evolution 2023.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad175
PMCID: PMC10414812
PMID: 37552897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad176. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad176.

Centromere Plasticity With Evolutionary Conservation and Divergence Uncovered by 
Wheat 10+ Genomes.

Ma H(1), Ding W(1), Chen Y(1), Zhou J(1), Chen W(1), Lan C(1), Mao H(1), Li 
Q(1), Yan W(1), Su H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Hubei Hongshan 
Laboratory, Shenzhen Institute of Nutrition and Health, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Genomics 
Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen, 
China.

Centromeres (CEN) are the chromosomal regions that play a crucial role in 
maintaining genomic stability. The underlying highly repetitive DNA sequences 
can evolve quickly in most eukaryotes, and promote karyotype evolution. Despite 
their variability, it is not fully understood how these widely variable 
sequences ensure the homeostasis of centromere function. In this study, we 
investigated the genetics and epigenetics of CEN in a population of wheat lines 
from global breeding programs. We captured a high degree of sequences, 
positioning, and epigenetic variations in the large and complex wheat CEN. We 
found that most CENH3-associated repeats are Cereba element of retrotransposons 
and exhibit phylogenetic homogenization across different wheat lines, but the 
less-associated repeat sequences diverge on their own way in each wheat line, 
implying specific mechanisms for selecting certain repeat types as functional 
core CEN. Furthermore, we observed that CENH3 nucleosome structures display 
looser wrapping of DNA termini on complex centromeric repeats, including the 
repositioned CEN. We also found that strict CENH3 nucleosome positioning and 
intrinsic DNA features play a role in determining centromere identity among 
different lines. Specific non-B form DNAs were substantially associated with 
CENH3 nucleosomes for the repositioned centromeres. These findings suggest that 
multiple mechanisms were involved in the adaptation of CENH3 nucleosomes that 
can stabilize CEN. Ultimately, we proposed a remarkable epigenetic plasticity of 
centromere chromatin within the diverse genomic context, and the high robustness 
is crucial for maintaining centromere function and genome stability in wheat 10+ 
lines as a result of past breeding selections.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad176
PMCID: PMC10422864
PMID: 37541261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conﬂict of interest statement: The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


208. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad174. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad174.

Germ Granule Evolution Provides Mechanistic Insight into Drosophila Germline 
Development.

Doyle DA(1), Burian FN(1), Aharoni B(1), Klinder AJ(1), Menzel MM(1), Nifras 
GCC(1), Shabazz-Henry AL(1), Palma BU(1), Hidalgo GA(1), Sottolano CJ(2), Ortega 
BM(1), Niepielko MG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Integrative Science and Technology, Kean University, Union, NJ, 
USA.
(2)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Rutgers, The State 
University of New Jersey, Camden, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Kean University, Union, NJ, USA.

The copackaging of mRNAs into biomolecular condensates called germ granules is a 
conserved strategy to posttranscriptionally regulate germline mRNAs. In 
Drosophila melanogaster, mRNAs accumulate in germ granules by forming homotypic 
clusters, aggregates containing multiple transcripts from the same gene. 
Nucleated by Oskar (Osk), homotypic clusters are generated through a stochastic 
seeding and self-recruitment process that requires the 3' untranslated region 
(UTR) of germ granule mRNAs. Interestingly, the 3' UTR belonging to germ granule 
mRNAs, such as nanos (nos), have considerable sequence variations among 
Drosophila species and we hypothesized that this diversity influences homotypic 
clustering. To test our hypothesis, we investigated the homotypic clustering of 
nos and polar granule component (pgc) in four Drosophila species and concluded 
that clustering is a conserved process used to enrich germ granule mRNAs. 
However, we discovered germ granule phenotypes that included significant changes 
in the abundance of transcripts present in species' homotypic clusters, which 
also reflected diversity in the number of coalesced primordial germ cells within 
their embryonic gonads. By integrating biological data with computational 
modeling, we found that multiple mechanisms underlie naturally occurring germ 
granule diversity, including changes in nos, pgc, osk levels and/or homotypic 
clustering efficacy. Furthermore, we demonstrated how the nos 3' UTR from 
different species influences nos clustering, causing granules to have ∼70% less 
nos and increasing the presence of defective primordial germ cells. Our results 
highlight the impact that evolution has on germ granules, which should provide 
broader insight into processes that modify compositions and activities of other 
classes of biomolecular condensate.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad174
PMCID: PMC10414811
PMID: 37527522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad169. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad169.

On the Decoupling of Evolutionary Changes in mRNA and Protein Levels.

Jiang D(1), Cope AL(2)(3)(4), Zhang J(5), Pennell M(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Quantitative and Computational Biology, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
(3)Human Genetics Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, 
USA.
(4)Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, 
USA.
(5)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Apr 08;:

Variation in gene expression across lineages is thought to explain much of the 
observed phenotypic variation and adaptation. The protein is closer to the 
target of natural selection but gene expression is typically measured as the 
amount of mRNA. The broad assumption that mRNA levels are good proxies for 
protein levels has been undermined by a number of studies reporting moderate or 
weak correlations between the two measures across species. One biological 
explanation for this discrepancy is that there has been compensatory evolution 
between the mRNA level and regulation of translation. However, we do not 
understand the evolutionary conditions necessary for this to occur nor the 
expected strength of the correlation between mRNA and protein levels. Here, we 
develop a theoretical model for the coevolution of mRNA and protein levels and 
investigate the dynamics of the model over time. We find that compensatory 
evolution is widespread when there is stabilizing selection on the protein 
level; this observation held true across a variety of regulatory pathways. When 
the protein level is under directional selection, the mRNA level of a gene and 
the translation rate of the same gene were negatively correlated across lineages 
but positively correlated across genes. These findings help explain results from 
comparative studies of gene expression and potentially enable researchers to 
disentangle biological and statistical hypotheses for the mismatch between 
transcriptomic and proteomic data.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad169
PMCID: PMC10411491
PMID: 37498582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad172. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad172.

Third-Generation Sequencing Reveals the Adaptive Role of the Epigenome in Three 
Deep-Sea Polychaetes.

Perez M(1)(2)(3), Aroh O(4), Sun Y(5), Lan Y(1)(2), Juniper SK(6), Young CR(7), 
Angers B(3), Qian PY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Ocean Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology, Kowloon, China.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Marine Organism Taxonomy and Phylogeny, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Institute of Oceanology, Qingdao, China.
(6)School of Earth and Ocean Sciences, University of Victoria, Victoria, Canada.
(7)National Oceanography Center, Southampton, UK.

The roles of DNA methylation in invertebrates are poorly characterized, and 
critical data are missing for the phylum Annelida. We fill this knowledge gap by 
conducting the first genome-wide survey of DNA methylation in the deep-sea 
polychaetes dominant in deep-sea vents and seeps: Paraescarpia echinospica, 
Ridgeia piscesae, and Paralvinella palmiformis. DNA methylation calls were 
inferred from Oxford Nanopore sequencing after assembling high-quality genomes 
of these animals. The genomes of these worms encode all the key enzymes of the 
DNA methylation metabolism and possess a mosaic methylome similar to that of 
other invertebrates. Transcriptomic data of these polychaetes support the 
hypotheses that gene body methylation strengthens the expression of housekeeping 
genes and that promoter methylation acts as a silencing mechanism but not the 
hypothesis that DNA methylation suppresses the activity of transposable 
elements. The conserved epigenetic profiles of genes responsible for maintaining 
homeostasis under extreme hydrostatic pressure suggest DNA methylation plays an 
important adaptive role in these worms.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad172
PMCID: PMC10414810
PMID: 37494294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad168. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad168.

Chromosome-Aware Phylogenomics of Assassin Bugs (Hemiptera: Reduvioidea) 
Elucidates Ancient Gene Conflict.

Knyshov A(1), Gordon ERL(2), Masonick PK(1), Castillo S(1), Forero D(3), 
Hoey-Chamberlain R(1), Hwang WS(4), Johnson KP(5), Lemmon AR(6), Moriarty Lemmon 
E(7), Standring S(1), Zhang J(8), Weirauch C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
(2)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Department, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT, USA.
(3)Instituto de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Bogota, 
Colombia.
(4)Lee Kong Chian Natural History Museum, National University of Singapore, 
Queenstown, Singapore.
(5)Illinois Natural History Survey, Prairie Research Institute, University of 
Illinois, Champaign, IL, USA.
(6)Department of Scientific Computing, Florida State University, Tallahassee, 
FL, USA.
(7)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, 
USA.
(8)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Application of Hebei Province, 
Institute of Life Science and Green Development, College of Life Sciences, Hebei 
University, Baoding, Hebei, China.

Though the phylogenetic signal of loci on sex chromosomes can differ from those 
on autosomes, chromosomal-level genome assemblies for nonvertebrates are still 
relatively scarce and conservation of chromosomal gene content across deep 
phylogenetic scales has therefore remained largely unexplored. We here assemble 
a uniquely large and diverse set of samples (17 anchored hybrid enrichment, 24 
RNA-seq, and 70 whole-genome sequencing samples of variable depth) for the 
medically important assassin bugs (Reduvioidea). We assess the performance of 
genes based on multiple features (e.g., nucleotide vs. amino acid, nuclear vs. 
mitochondrial, and autosomal vs. X chromosomal) and employ different methods 
(concatenation and coalescence analyses) to reconstruct the unresolved phylogeny 
of this diverse (∼7,000 spp.) and old (>180 Ma) group. Our results show that 
genes on the X chromosome are more likely to have discordant phylogenies than 
those on autosomes. We find that the X chromosome conflict is driven by high 
gene substitution rates that impact the accuracy of phylogenetic inference. 
However, gene tree clustering showed strong conflict even after discounting 
variable third codon positions. Alternative topologies were not particularly 
enriched for sex chromosome loci, but spread across the genome. We conclude that 
binning genes to autosomal or sex chromosomes may result in a more accurate 
picture of the complex evolutionary history of a clade.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad168
PMCID: PMC10411492
PMID: 37494292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad171. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad171.

Whole Genome Duplication and Gene Evolution in the Hyperdiverse Venomous 
Gastropods.

Farhat S(1), Modica MV(2), Puillandre N(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Systématique Evolution Biodiversité (ISYEB), Muséum national 
d'Histoire naturelle, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, EPHE, Université des Antilles, 
Paris, France.
(2)Department of Biology and Evolution of Marine Organisms (BEOM), Stazione 
Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Roma, Italy.

The diversity of venomous organisms and the toxins they produce have been 
increasingly investigated, but taxonomic bias remains important. Neogastropods, 
a group of marine predators representing almost 22% of the known gastropod 
diversity, evolved a wide range of feeding strategies, including the production 
of toxins to subdue their preys. However, whether the diversity of these 
compounds is at the origin of the hyperdiversification of the group and how 
genome evolution may correlate with both the compounds and species diversities 
remain understudied. Among the available gastropods genomes, only eight, with 
uneven quality assemblies, belong to neogastropods. Here, we generated 
chromosome-level assemblies of two species belonging to the Tonnoidea and 
Muricoidea superfamilies (Monoplex corrugatus and Stramonita haemastoma). The 
two obtained high-quality genomes had 3 and 2.2 Gb, respectively, and 92-89% of 
the total assembly conformed 35 pseudochromosomes in each species. Through the 
analysis of syntenic blocks, Hox gene cluster duplication, and synonymous 
substitutions distribution pattern, we inferred the occurrence of a whole genome 
duplication event in both genomes. As these species are known to release venom, 
toxins were annotated in both genomes, but few of them were found in homologous 
chromosomes. A comparison of the expression of ohnolog genes (using 
transcriptomes from osphradium and salivary glands in S. haemastoma), where both 
copies were differentially expressed, showed that most of them had similar 
expression profiles. The high quality of these genomes makes them valuable 
reference in their respective taxa, facilitating the identification of 
genome-level processes at the origin of their evolutionary success.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad171
PMCID: PMC10401626
PMID: 37494290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad173. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad173.

Integrative Omics Reveals Rapidly Evolving Regulatory Sequences Driving Primate 
Brain Evolution.

Zhuang XL(1)(2), Zhang JJ(1)(2), Shao Y(1)(2), Ye Y(1)(2), Chen CY(3), Zhou 
L(4)(5)(6), Wang ZB(7), Luo X(1)(2), Su B(1)(8), Yao YG(2)(9)(10)(11), Cooper 
DN(12), Hu BX(1), Wang L(13), Qi XG(13), Lin J(1), Zhang GJ(5)(6), Wang 
W(1)(3)(8), Sheng N(1)(8), Wu DD(1)(8)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Natural 
History Museum of Zoology, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(3)School of Ecology and Environment, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 
Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(4)Center for Evolutionary & Organismal Biology, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(5)Center of Evolutionary & Organismal Biology, and Women's Hospital at Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(6)Liangzhu Laboratory, Zhejiang University Medical Center, Hangzhou, Guangdong, 
China.
(7)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Primate Biomedicine Research, Institute of Primate 
Translational Medicine, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, 
Yunnan, China.
(8)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(9)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(10)National Resource Center for Non-Human Primates, Kunming Primate Research 
Center, and National Research Facility for Phenotypic & Genetic Analysis of 
Model Animals (Primate Facility), Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(11)KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common 
Diseases, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 
Yunnan, China.
(12)Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, 
Cardiff, Wales, UK.
(13)College of Life Sciences, Northwest University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.

Although the continual expansion of the brain during primate evolution accounts 
for our enhanced cognitive capabilities, the drivers of brain evolution have 
scarcely been explored in these ancestral nodes. Here, we performed large-scale 
comparative genomic, transcriptomic, and epigenomic analyses to investigate the 
evolutionary alterations acquired by brain genes and provide comprehensive 
listings of innovatory genetic elements along the evolutionary path from 
ancestral primates to human. The regulatory sequences associated with 
brain-expressed genes experienced rapid change, particularly in the ancestor of 
the Simiiformes. Extensive comparisons of single-cell and bulk transcriptomic 
data between primate and nonprimate brains revealed that these regulatory 
sequences may drive the high expression of certain genes in primate brains. 
Employing in utero electroporation into mouse embryonic cortex, we show that the 
primate-specific brain-biased gene BMP7 was recruited, probably in the ancestor 
of the Simiiformes, to regulate neuronal proliferation in the primate 
ventricular zone. Our study provides a comprehensive listing of genes and 
regulatory changes along the brain evolution lineage of ancestral primates 
leading to human. These data should be invaluable for future functional studies 
that will deepen our understanding not only of the genetic basis of human brain 
evolution but also of inherited disease.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad173
PMCID: PMC10404817
PMID: 37494289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad170. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad170.

Unraveling Prevalence and Effects of Deleterious Mutations in Maize Elite Lines 
across Decades of Modern Breeding.

Sun S(1), Wang B(2), Li C(2), Xu G(3), Yang J(3), Hufford MB(4), Ross-Ibarra 
J(5), Wang H(6)(7), Wang L(1)(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Genomics 
Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen, 
China.
(2)Biotechnology Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, NE, USA.
(4)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA, USA.
(5)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, Davis, CA, 
USA.
(6)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Kunpeng Institute of Modern Agriculture at Foshan, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Foshan, China.

Future breeding is likely to involve the detection and removal of deleterious 
alleles, which are mutations that negatively affect crop fitness. However, 
little is known about the prevalence of such mutations and their effects on 
phenotypic traits in the context of modern crop breeding. To address this, we 
examined the number and frequency of deleterious mutations in 350 elite maize 
inbred lines developed over the past few decades in China and the United States. 
Our findings reveal an accumulation of weakly deleterious mutations and a 
decrease in strongly deleterious mutations, indicating the dominant effects of 
genetic drift and purifying selection for the two types of mutations, 
respectively. We also discovered that slightly deleterious mutations, when at 
lower frequencies, were more likely to be heterozygous in the developed hybrids. 
This is consistent with complementation as a potential explanation for 
heterosis. Subsequently, we found that deleterious mutations accounted for more 
of the variation in phenotypic traits than nondeleterious mutations with matched 
minor allele frequencies, especially for traits related to leaf angle and 
flowering time. Moreover, we detected fewer deleterious mutations in the 
promoter and gene body regions of differentially expressed genes across breeding 
eras than in nondifferentially expressed genes. Overall, our results provide a 
comprehensive assessment of the prevalence and impact of deleterious mutations 
in modern maize breeding and establish a useful baseline for future maize 
improvement efforts.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad170
PMCID: PMC10414807
PMID: 37494285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad167. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad167.

Y-Linked Copy Number Polymorphism of Target of Rapamycin Is Associated with 
Sexual Size Dimorphism in Seed Beetles.

Kaufmann P(1), Wiberg RAW(1)(2), Papachristos K(3), Scofield DG(4), 
Tellgren-Roth C(5), Immonen E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics (Evolutionary Biology program), Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Ecology Division, Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Molecular Evolution, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Uppsala Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Computational Science, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)National Genomics Infrastructure, Uppsala Genome Center, SciLifeLab, 
BioMedical Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

The Y chromosome is theorized to facilitate evolution of sexual dimorphism by 
accumulating sexually antagonistic loci, but empirical support is scarce. Due to 
the lack of recombination, Y chromosomes are prone to degenerative processes, 
which poses a constraint on their adaptive potential. Yet, in the seed beetle, 
Callosobruchus maculatus segregating Y linked variation affects male body size 
and thereby sexual size dimorphism (SSD). Here, we assemble C. maculatus sex 
chromosome sequences and identify molecular differences associated with Y-linked 
SSD variation. The assembled Y chromosome is largely euchromatic and contains 
over 400 genes, many of which are ampliconic with a mixed autosomal and X 
chromosome ancestry. Functional annotation suggests that the Y chromosome plays 
important roles in males beyond primary reproductive functions. Crucially, we 
find that, besides an autosomal copy of the gene target of rapamycin (TOR), 
males carry an additional TOR copy on the Y chromosome. TOR is a conserved 
regulator of growth across taxa, and our results suggest that a Y-linked TOR 
provides a male specific opportunity to alter body size. A comparison of Y 
haplotypes associated with male size difference uncovers a copy number variation 
for TOR, where the haplotype associated with decreased male size, and thereby 
increased sexual dimorphism, has two additional TOR copies. This suggests that 
sexual conflict over growth has been mitigated by autosome to Y translocation of 
TOR followed by gene duplications. Our results reveal that despite of suppressed 
recombination, the Y chromosome can harbor adaptive potential as a male-limited 
supergene.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad167
PMCID: PMC10414808
PMID: 37479678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad165. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad165.

Computational Reproducibility of Molecular Phylogenies.

Kumar S(1)(2), Tao Q(1)(2), Lamarca AP(1)(2)(3), Tamura K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(4)Research Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Tokyo Metropolitan 
University, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Hachioji, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Repeated runs of the same program can generate different molecular phylogenies 
from identical data sets under the same analytical conditions. This lack of 
reproducibility of inferred phylogenies casts a long shadow on downstream 
research employing these phylogenies in areas such as comparative genomics, 
systematics, and functional biology. We have assessed the relative accuracies 
and log-likelihoods of alternative phylogenies generated for computer-simulated 
and empirical data sets. Our findings indicate that these alternative 
phylogenies reconstruct evolutionary relationships with comparable accuracy. 
They also have similar log-likelihoods that are not inferior to the 
log-likelihoods of the true tree. We determined that the direct relationship 
between irreproducibility and inaccuracy is due to their common dependence on 
the amount of phylogenetic information in the data. While computational 
reproducibility can be enhanced through more extensive heuristic searches for 
the maximum likelihood tree, this does not lead to higher accuracy. We conclude 
that computational irreproducibility plays a minor role in molecular 
phylogenetics.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad165
PMCID: PMC10370456
PMID: 37467477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad166. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad166.

Subtle Introgression Footprints at the End of the Speciation Continuum in a 
Clade of Heliconius Butterflies.

Rougemont Q(1), Huber B(2)(3)(4), Martin SH(5), Whibley A(2), Estrada C(3)(6), 
Solano D(3), Orpet R(3)(7), McMillan WO(3), Frérot B(8), Joron M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, University of Montpellier, 
CNRS, EPHE, IRD, Montpellier, France.
(2)Institut de Systématique, Evolution et Biodiversité, Muséum National 
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.
(3)Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Gamboa, Panama.
(4)Instituto de Ciencias Ambientales y Ecológicas (ICAE), Universidad de Los 
Andes, Mérida, Venezuela.
(5)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park, London, 
United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Entomology, Washington State University, Wenatchee, WA, USA.
(8)INRAE, CNRS, IRD, UPEC, Sorbonne Université, Institute of Ecology and 
Environmental Sciences of Paris, Université de Paris, Versailles, France.

Quantifying gene flow between lineages at different stages of the speciation 
continuum is central to understanding speciation. Heliconius butterflies have 
undergone an adaptive radiation in wing color patterns driven partly by natural 
selection for local mimicry. Color patterns are also known to be used as 
assortative mating cues. Therefore, wing pattern divergence is considered to 
play a role in speciation. A corollary is that mimicry between closely related 
species may be associated with hybridization and interfere with reproductive 
isolation. Here, we take a multifaceted approach to explore speciation history, 
species boundaries, and traits involved in species differentiation between the 
two closely related species, Heliconius hecale and Heliconius ismenius. We focus 
on geographic regions where the two species mimic each other and contrast this 
with geographic regions where they do not mimic each other. To examine 
population history and patterns of gene flow, we tested and compared a 
four-population model accounting for linked selection. This model suggests that 
the two species have remained isolated for a large part of their history, yet 
with a small amount of gene exchange. Accordingly, signatures of genomic 
introgression were small except at a major wing pattern allele and chemosensing 
genes and stronger in the mimetic populations compared with nonmimetic 
populations. Behavioral assays confirm that visual confusion exists but that 
short-range cues determine strong sexual isolation. Tests for chemical 
differentiation between species identified major differences in putative 
pheromones which likely mediate mate choice and the maintenance of species 
differences.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad166
PMCID: PMC10375063
PMID: 37467472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad164. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad164.

Phylogenetic Reconstruction and Functional Characterization of the Ancestral Nef 
Protein of Primate Lentiviruses.

Olabode AS(1), Mumby MJ(2), Wild TA(2), Muñoz-Baena L(2), Dikeakos JD(2), Poon 
AFY(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Western University, London, Canada.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Western University, London, Canada.

Nef is an accessory protein unique to the primate HIV-1, HIV-2, and SIV 
lentiviruses. During infection, Nef functions by interacting with multiple host 
proteins within infected cells to evade the immune response and enhance virion 
infectivity. Notably, Nef can counter immune regulators such as CD4 and MHC-I, 
as well as the SERINC5 restriction factor in infected cells. In this study, we 
generated a posterior sample of time-scaled phylogenies relating SIV and HIV Nef 
sequences, followed by reconstruction of ancestral sequences at the root and 
internal nodes of the sampled trees up to the HIV-1 Group M ancestor. Upon 
expression of the ancestral primate lentivirus Nef protein within CD4+ HeLa 
cells, flow cytometry analysis revealed that the primate lentivirus Nef ancestor 
robustly downregulated cell-surface SERINC5, yet only partially downregulated 
CD4 from the cell surface. Further analysis revealed that the Nef-mediated CD4 
downregulation ability evolved gradually, while Nef-mediated SERINC5 
downregulation was recovered abruptly in the HIV-1/M ancestor. Overall, this 
study provides a framework to reconstruct ancestral viral proteins and enable 
the functional characterization of these proteins to delineate how functions 
could have changed throughout evolutionary history.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad164
PMCID: PMC10400143
PMID: 37463439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad163. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad163.

Rewiring of Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase Localization and Interactions in Plants 
With Extensive Mitochondrial tRNA Gene Loss.

Warren JM(1)(2), Broz AK(2), Martinez-Hottovy A(3), Elowsky C(4), Christensen 
AC(3), Sloan DB(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, Biodesign Institute and School of Life 
Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, 
USA.
(4)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, NE, USA.

The number of tRNAs encoded in plant mitochondrial genomes varies considerably. 
Ongoing loss of bacterial-like mitochondrial tRNA genes in many lineages 
necessitates the import of nuclear-encoded counterparts that share little 
sequence similarity. Because tRNAs are involved in highly specific molecular 
interactions, this replacement process raises questions about the identity and 
trafficking of enzymes necessary for the maturation and function of newly 
imported tRNAs. In particular, the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) that 
charge tRNAs are usually divided into distinct classes that specialize on either 
organellar (mitochondrial and plastid) or nuclear-encoded (cytosolic) tRNAs. 
Here, we investigate the evolution of aaRS subcellular localization in a plant 
lineage (Sileneae) that has experienced extensive and rapid mitochondrial tRNA 
loss. By analyzing full-length mRNA transcripts (PacBio Iso-Seq), we found 
predicted retargeting of many ancestrally cytosolic aaRSs to the mitochondrion 
and confirmed these results with colocalization microscopy assays. However, we 
also found cases where aaRS localization does not appear to change despite 
functional tRNA replacement, suggesting evolution of novel interactions and 
charging relationships. Therefore, the history of repeated tRNA replacement in 
Sileneae mitochondria reveals that differing constraints on tRNA/aaRS 
interactions may determine which of these alternative coevolutionary paths is 
used to maintain organellar translation in plant cells.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad163
PMCID: PMC10375062
PMID: 37463427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad162. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad162.

High-Altitude Andean H194R HIF2A Allele Is a Hypomorphic Allele.

Jorgensen K(1), Song D(2), Weinstein J(3), Garcia OA(4), Pearson LN(5), Inclán 
M(6), Rivera-Chira M(7), León-Velarde F(7), Kiyamu M(7), Brutsaert TD(8), Bigham 
AW(1), Lee FS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Anthropology, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Anthropology, The Pennsylvania State University, State College, 
PA, USA.
(6)División de. Estudios Políticos, Centro de Investigación y Docencia 
Económicas, Mexico City, CDMX, Mexico.
(7)Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas y Fisiológicas, Laboratorios de 
Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad de Ciencias y Filosofía, Universidad 
Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Lima, Peru.
(8)Department of Exercise Science, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA.

For over 10,000 years, Andeans have resided at high altitude where the partial 
pressure of oxygen challenges human survival. Recent studies have provided 
evidence for positive selection acting in Andeans on the HIF2A (also known as 
EPAS1) locus, which encodes for a central transcription factor of the 
hypoxia-inducible factor pathway. However, the precise mechanism by which this 
allele might lead to altitude-adaptive phenotypes, if any, is unknown. By 
analyzing whole genome sequencing data from 46 high-coverage Peruvian Andean 
genomes, we confirm evidence for positive selection acting on HIF2A and a unique 
pattern of variation surrounding the Andean-specific single nucleotide variant 
(SNV), rs570553380, which encodes for an H194R amino acid substitution in 
HIF-2α. Genotyping the Andean-associated SNV rs570553380 in a group of 299 
Peruvian Andeans from Cerro de Pasco, Peru (4,338 m), reveals a positive 
association with increased fraction of exhaled nitric oxide, a marker of nitric 
oxide biosynthesis. In vitro assays show that the H194R mutation impairs binding 
of HIF-2α to its heterodimeric partner, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear 
translocator. A knockin mouse model bearing the H194R mutation in the Hif2a gene 
displays decreased levels of hypoxia-induced pulmonary Endothelin-1 transcripts 
and protection against hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension. We conclude the 
Andean H194R HIF2A allele is a hypomorphic (partial loss of function) allele.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad162
PMCID: PMC10370452
PMID: 37463421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad160. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad160.

Multiple Sources of Uncertainty Confound Inference of Historical Human 
Generation Times.

Ragsdale AP(1), Thornton KR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 
Irvine, CA, USA.

Wang et al. (2023) recently proposed an approach to infer the history of human 
generation intervals from changes in mutation profiles over time. As the 
relative proportions of different mutation types depend on the ages of parents, 
binning variants by the time they arose allows for the inference of changes in 
average paternal and maternal generation intervals. Applying this approach to 
published allele age estimates, Wang et al. (2023) inferred long-lasting sex 
differences in average generation times and surprisingly found that ancestral 
generation times of West African populations remained substantially higher than 
those of Eurasian populations extending tens of thousands of generations into 
the past. Here, we argue that the results and interpretations in Wang et al. 
(2023) are primarily driven by noise and biases in input data and a lack of 
validation using independent approaches for estimating allele ages. With the 
recent development of methods to reconstruct genome-wide gene genealogies, 
coalescence times, and allele ages, we caution that downstream analyses may be 
strongly influenced by uncharacterized biases in their output.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad160
PMCID: PMC10404577
PMID: 37450583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad161. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad161.

Proterozoic Acquisition of Archaeal Genes for Extracellular Electron Transfer: A 
Metabolic Adaptation of Aerobic Ammonia-Oxidizing Bacteria to Oxygen Limitation.

Gulay A(1)(2), Fournier G(3), Smets BF(2), Girguis PR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Technical University of 
Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(3)Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Many aerobic microbes can utilize alternative electron acceptors under 
oxygen-limited conditions. In some cases, this is mediated by extracellular 
electron transfer (or EET), wherein electrons are transferred to extracellular 
oxidants such as iron oxide and manganese oxide minerals. Here, we show that an 
ammonia-oxidizer previously known to be strictly aerobic, Nitrosomonas communis, 
may have been able to utilize a poised electrode to maintain metabolic activity 
in anoxic conditions. The presence and activity of multiheme cytochromes in N. 
communis further suggest a capacity for EET. Molecular clock analysis shows that 
the ancestors of β-proteobacterial ammonia oxidizers appeared after Earth's 
atmospheric oxygenation when the oxygen levels were >10-4pO2 (present 
atmospheric level [PAL]), consistent with aerobic origins. Equally important, 
phylogenetic reconciliations of gene and species trees show that the multiheme 
c-type EET proteins in Nitrosomonas and Nitrosospira lineages were likely 
acquired by gene transfer from γ-proteobacteria when the oxygen levels were 
between 0.1 and 1 pO2 (PAL). These results suggest that β-proteobacterial EET 
evolved during the Proterozoic when oxygen limitation was widespread, but 
oxidized minerals were abundant.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad161
PMCID: PMC10415592
PMID: 37440531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad159. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad159.

Likelihood-Based Tests of Species Tree Hypotheses.

Adams R(1)(2), DeGiorgio M(3).

Author information:
(1)Agricultural Statistics Laboratory, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR.
(2)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, University of Arkansas, 
Fayetteville, AR.
(3)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Florida Atlantic 
University, Boca Raton, FL.

Likelihood-based tests of phylogenetic trees are a foundation of modern 
systematics. Over the past decade, an enormous wealth and diversity of 
model-based approaches have been developed for phylogenetic inference of both 
gene trees and species trees. However, while many techniques exist for 
conducting formal likelihood-based tests of gene trees, such frameworks are 
comparatively underdeveloped and underutilized for testing species tree 
hypotheses. To date, widely used tests of tree topology are designed to assess 
the fit of classical models of molecular sequence data and individual gene trees 
and thus are not readily applicable to the problem of species tree inference. To 
address this issue, we derive several analogous likelihood-based approaches for 
testing topologies using modern species tree models and heuristic algorithms 
that use gene tree topologies as input for maximum likelihood estimation under 
the multispecies coalescent. For the purpose of comparing support for species 
trees, these tests leverage the statistical procedures of their original gene 
tree-based counterparts that have an extended history for testing phylogenetic 
hypotheses at a single locus. We discuss and demonstrate a number of 
applications, limitations, and important considerations of these tests using 
simulated and empirical phylogenomic data sets that include both bifurcating 
topologies and reticulate network models of species relationships. Finally, we 
introduce the open-source R package SpeciesTopoTestR (SpeciesTopology Tests in 
R) that includes a suite of functions for conducting formal likelihood-based 
tests of species topologies given a set of input gene tree topologies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad159
PMCID: PMC10368450
PMID: 37440530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad158. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad158.

Multiple Origins and Genomic Basis of Complex Traits in Sighthounds.

Li WL(1)(2), Liu YH(1), Li JX(1), Ding MT(1)(2), Adeola AC(1)(3), Isakova J(4), 
Aldashev AA(4), Peng MS(1)(3)(5), Huang X(5), Xie G(1), Chen X(6)(7), Yang 
WK(7), Zhou WW(1), Ghanatsaman ZA(8), Olaogun SC(9), Sanke OJ(10), Dawuda 
PM(11), Hytönen MK(12)(13)(14), Lohi H(12)(13)(14), Esmailizadeh A(1)(15), 
Poyarkov AD(16), Savolainen P(17), Wang GD(1)(3), Zhang YP(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Yunnan Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming, China.
(3)Sino-Africa Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 
China.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular and Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology and 
Medicine, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, China.
(6)Research Center for Ecology and Environment of Central Asia, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Urumqi, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Biogeography and Bioresource in Arid Land, Xinjiang 
Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, China.
(8)Animal Science Research Department, Fars Agricultural and Natural Resources 
research and Education Center, Agricultural Research, Education and Extension 
Organization (AREEO), Shiraz, Iran.
(9)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(10)Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Taraba State Government, 
Jalingo, Nigeria.
(11)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, National University of 
Lesotho, Roma, Southern Africa.
(12)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(13)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.
(14)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(15)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Shahid Bahonar 
University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran.
(16)Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Russian Academy of Science, 
Moscow, Russia.
(17)KTH Royal Institute of Technology, School of Engineering Sciences in 
Chemistry, Biotechnology and Health, Department of Gene Technology, Science for 
Life Laboratory, Solna, Sweden.

Sighthounds, a distinctive group of hounds comprising numerous breeds, have 
their origins rooted in ancient artificial selection of dogs. In this study, we 
performed genome sequencing for 123 sighthounds, including one breed from 
Africa, six breeds from Europe, two breeds from Russia, and four breeds and 12 
village dogs from the Middle East. We gathered public genome data of five 
sighthounds and 98 other dogs as well as 31 gray wolves to pinpoint the origin 
and genes influencing the morphology of the sighthound genome. Population 
genomic analysis suggested that sighthounds originated from native dogs 
independently and were comprehensively admixed among breeds, supporting the 
multiple origins hypothesis of sighthounds. An additional 67 published ancient 
wolf genomes were added for gene flow detection. Results showed dramatic 
admixture of ancient wolves in African sighthounds, even more than with modern 
wolves. Whole-genome scan analysis identified 17 positively selected genes 
(PSGs) in the African population, 27 PSGs in the European population, and 54 
PSGs in the Middle Eastern population. None of the PSGs overlapped in the three 
populations. Pooled PSGs of the three populations were significantly enriched in 
"regulation of release of sequestered calcium ion into cytosol" (gene ontology: 
0051279), which is related to blood circulation and heart contraction. In 
addition, ESR1, JAK2, ADRB1, PRKCE, and CAMK2D were under positive selection in 
all three selected groups. This suggests that different PSGs in the same pathway 
contributed to the similar phenotype of sighthounds. We identified an ESR1 
mutation (chr1: g.42,177,149 T > C) in the transcription factor (TF) binding 
site of Stat5a and a JAK2 mutation (chr1: g.93,277,007 T > A) in the TF binding 
site of Sox5. Functional experiments confirmed that the ESR1 and JAK2 mutation 
reduced their expression. Our results provide new insights into the 
domestication history and genomic basis of sighthounds.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad158
PMCID: PMC10401622
PMID: 37433053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad157. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad157.

Uncovering Footprints of Natural Selection Through Spectral Analysis of Genomic 
Summary Statistics.

Arnab SP(1), Amin MR(1), DeGiorgio M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Florida Atlantic 
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA.

Natural selection leaves a spatial pattern along the genome, with a haplotype 
distribution distortion near the selected locus that fades with distance. 
Evaluating the spatial signal of a population-genetic summary statistic across 
the genome allows for patterns of natural selection to be distinguished from 
neutrality. Considering the genomic spatial distribution of multiple summary 
statistics is expected to aid in uncovering subtle signatures of selection. In 
recent years, numerous methods have been devised that consider genomic spatial 
distributions across summary statistics, utilizing both classical machine 
learning and deep learning architectures. However, better predictions may be 
attainable by improving the way in which features are extracted from these 
summary statistics. We apply wavelet transform, multitaper spectral analysis, 
and S-transform to summary statistic arrays to achieve this goal. Each analysis 
method converts one-dimensional summary statistic arrays to two-dimensional 
images of spectral analysis, allowing simultaneous temporal and spectral 
assessment. We feed these images into convolutional neural networks and consider 
combining models using ensemble stacking. Our modeling framework achieves high 
accuracy and power across a diverse set of evolutionary settings, including 
population size changes and test sets of varying sweep strength, softness, and 
timing. A scan of central European whole-genome sequences recapitulated 
well-established sweep candidates and predicted novel cancer-associated genes as 
sweeps with high support. Given that this modeling framework is also robust to 
missing genomic segments, we believe that it will represent a welcome addition 
to the population-genomic toolkit for learning about adaptive processes from 
genomic data.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad157
PMCID: PMC10365025
PMID: 37433019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad122. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad122.

Transition to Self-compatibility Associated With Dominant S-allele in a Diploid 
Siberian Progenitor of Allotetraploid Arabidopsis kamchatica Revealed by 
Arabidopsis lyrata Genomes.

Kolesnikova UK(1), Scott AD(1), Van de Velde JD(1), Burns R(2), Tikhomirov 
NP(3)(4), Pfordt U(1), Clarke AC(5), Yant L(6), Seregin AP(7), Vekemans X(8), 
Laurent S(9), Novikova PY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chromosome Biology, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding 
Research, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Faculty of Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Papanin Institute for Biology of Inland Waters, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Borok, Russia.
(5)Future Food Beacon of Excellence and School of Biosciences, University of 
Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, United Kingdom.
(6)Future Food Beacon of Excellence and School of Life Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(7)Herbarium (MW), Faculty of Biology, M. V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, 
Moscow, Russia.
(8)University Lille, CNRS, UMR 8198-Evo-Eco-Paleo, Lille, France.
(9)Department of Comparative Development and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for 
Plant Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany.

A transition to selfing can be beneficial when mating partners are scarce, for 
example, due to ploidy changes or at species range edges. Here, we explain how 
self-compatibility evolved in diploid Siberian Arabidopsis lyrata, and how it 
contributed to the establishment of allotetraploid Arabidopsis kamchatica. 
First, we provide chromosome-level genome assemblies for two self-fertilizing 
diploid A. lyrata accessions, one from North America and one from Siberia, 
including a fully assembled S-locus for the latter. We then propose a sequence 
of events leading to the loss of self-incompatibility in Siberian A. lyrata, 
date this independent transition to ∼90 Kya, and infer evolutionary 
relationships between Siberian and North American A. lyrata, showing an 
independent transition to selfing in Siberia. Finally, we provide evidence that 
this selfing Siberian A. lyrata lineage contributed to the formation of the 
allotetraploid A. kamchatica and propose that the selfing of the latter is 
mediated by the loss-of-function mutation in a dominant S-allele inherited from 
A. lyrata.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad122
PMCID: PMC10335350
PMID: 37432770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Aug 3;40(8):msad156. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad156.

Inferring Human Immunodeficiency Virus 1 Proviral Integration Dates With 
Bayesian Inference.

Jones BR(1)(2), Joy JB(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Epidemiology and Evolutionary Genetics, B.C. Centre for Excellence 
in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, Canada.
(2)Bioinformatics Program, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Deparment of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV) proviruses archived in the persistent 
reservoir currently pose the greatest obstacle to HIV cure due to their evasion 
of combined antiretroviral therapy and ability to reseed HIV infection. 
Understanding the dynamics of the HIV persistent reservoir is imperative for 
discovering a durable HIV cure. Here, we explore Bayesian methods using the 
software BEAST2 to estimate HIV proviral integration dates. We started with 
within-host longitudinal HIV sequences collected prior to therapy, along with 
sequences collected from the persistent reservoir during suppressive therapy. We 
built a BEAST2 model to estimate integration dates of proviral sequences 
collected during suppressive therapy, implementing a tip date random walker to 
adjust the sequence tip dates and a latency-specific prior to inform the dates. 
To validate our method, we implemented it on both simulated and empirical data 
sets. Consistent with previous studies, we found that proviral integration dates 
were spread throughout active infection. Path sampling to select an alternative 
prior for date estimation in place of the latency-specific prior produced 
unrealistic results in one empirical data set, whereas on another data set, the 
latency-specific prior was selected as best fitting. Our Bayesian method 
outperforms current date estimation techniques with a root mean squared error of 
0.89 years on simulated data relative to 1.23-1.89 years with previously 
developed methods. Bayesian methods offer an adaptable framework for inferring 
proviral integration dates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad156
PMCID: PMC10411489
PMID: 37421655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 3;40(7):msad151. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad151.

Ongoing Rapid Evolution of a Post-Y Region Revealed by Chromosome-Scale Genome 
Assembly of a Hexaploid Monoecious Persimmon (Diospyros kaki).

Horiuchi A(1), Masuda K(1), Shirasawa K(2), Onoue N(3), Fujita N(1), Ushijima 
K(1), Akagi T(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Environmental and Life Science, Okayama University, 
Okayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Frontier Research and Development, Kazusa DNA Research 
Institute, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Institute of Fruit Tree and Tea Science, NARO, Hiroshima, Japan.
(4)Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), PRESTO, Saitama, Japan.

Plants have evolved sex chromosomes independently in many lineages, and loss of 
separate sexes can also occur. In this study, we assembled a monoecious recently 
hexaploidized persimmon (Diospyros kaki), in which the Y chromosome has lost the 
maleness-determining function. Comparative genomic analysis of D. kaki and its 
dioecious relatives uncovered the evolutionary process by which the 
nonfunctional Y chromosome (or Ymonoecy) was derived, which involved silencing 
of the sex-determining gene, OGI, approximately 2 million years ago. Analyses of 
the entire X and Ymonoecy chromosomes suggested that D. kaki's nonfunctional 
male-specific region of the Y chromosome (MSY), which we call a post-MSY, has 
conserved some characteristics of the original functional MSY. Specifically, 
comparing the functional MSY in Diospyros lotus and the nonfunctional "post-MSY" 
in D. kaki indicated that both have been rapidly rearranged, mainly via ongoing 
transposable element bursts, resembling structural changes often detected in 
Y-linked regions, some of which can enlarge the nonrecombining regions. The 
recent evolution of the post-MSY (and possibly also MSYs in dioecious Diospyros 
species) therefore probably reflects these regions' ancestral location in a 
pericentromeric region, rather than the presence of male-determining genes 
and/or genes controlling sexually dimorphic traits.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad151
PMCID: PMC10350624
PMID: 37414545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad141. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad141.

Whole-genome Duplications and the Long-term Evolution of Gene Regulatory 
Networks in Angiosperms.

Almeida-Silva F(1)(2), Van de Peer Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Centre for Microbial Ecology and Genomics, Department of Biochemistry, 
Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(4)College of Horticulture, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, 
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

Angiosperms have a complex history of whole-genome duplications (WGDs), with 
varying numbers and ages of WGD events across clades. These WGDs have greatly 
affected the composition of plant genomes due to the biased retention of genes 
belonging to certain functional categories following their duplication. In 
particular, regulatory genes and genes encoding proteins that act in 
multiprotein complexes have been retained in excess following WGD. Here, we 
inferred protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks and gene regulatory networks 
(GRNs) for seven well-characterized angiosperm species and explored the impact 
of both WGD and small-scale duplications (SSDs) in network topology by analyzing 
changes in frequency of network motifs. We found that PPI networks are enriched 
in WGD-derived genes associated with dosage-sensitive intricate systems, and 
strong selection pressures constrain the divergence of WGD-derived genes at the 
sequence and PPI levels. WGD-derived genes in network motifs are mostly 
associated with dosage-sensitive processes, such as regulation of transcription 
and cell cycle, translation, photosynthesis, and carbon metabolism, whereas 
SSD-derived genes in motifs are associated with response to biotic and abiotic 
stress. Recent polyploids have higher motif frequencies than ancient polyploids, 
whereas WGD-derived network motifs tend to be disrupted on the longer term. Our 
findings demonstrate that both WGD and SSD have contributed to the evolution of 
angiosperm GRNs, but in different ways, with WGD events likely having a more 
significant impact on the short-term evolution of polyploids.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad141
PMCID: PMC10321489
PMID: 37405949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 3;40(7):msad155. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad155.

Whole-genome Analyses Reveal Past Population Fluctuations and Low Genetic 
Diversities of the North Pacific Albatrosses.

Huynh S(1), Cloutier A(1)(2), Chen G(1), Chan DTC(1), Lam DK(1), Huyvaert KP(3), 
Sato F(4), Edwards SV(2), Sin SYW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Museum of Comparative 
Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Fish, Wildlife and Conservation Biology, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(4)Yamashina Institute for Ornithology, Abiko, Japan.

Throughout the Plio-Pleistocene, climate change has impacted tropical marine 
ecosystems substantially, with even more severe impacts predicted in the 
Anthropocene. Although many studies have clarified demographic histories of 
seabirds in polar regions, the history of keystone seabirds of the tropics is 
unclear, despite the prominence of albatrosses (Diomedeidae, Procellariiformes) 
as the largest and most threatened group of oceanic seabirds. To understand the 
impact of climate change on tropical albatrosses, we investigated the 
evolutionary and demographic histories of all four North Pacific albatrosses and 
their prey using whole-genome analyses. We report a striking concordance in 
demographic histories among the four species, with a notable dip in effective 
population size at the beginning of the Pleistocene and a population expansion 
in the Last Glacial Period when sea levels were low, which resulted in increased 
potential coastal breeding sites. Abundance of the black-footed albatross 
dropped again during the Last Glacial Maximum, potentially linked to 
climate-driven loss of breeding sites and concordant genome-derived decreases in 
its major prey. We find very low genome-wide (π < 0.001) and adaptative genetic 
diversities across the albatrosses, with genes of the major histocompatibility 
complex close to monomorphic. We also identify recent selective sweeps at genes 
associated with hyperosmotic adaptation, longevity, and cognition and memory. 
Our study has shed light on the evolutionary and demographic histories of the 
largest tropical oceanic seabirds and provides evidence for their large 
population fluctuations and alarmingly low genetic diversities.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad155
PMCID: PMC10348050
PMID: 37402641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing interests.


231. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad153. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad153.

Shared Evolutionary Path in Social Microbiomes.

Frazão N(1), Gordo I(1).

Author information:
(1)Evolutionary Biology Laboratory, Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, 
Portugal.

Social networks can influence the ecology of gut bacteria, shaping the species 
composition of the gut microbiome in humans and other animals. Gut commensals 
evolve and can adapt at a rapid pace when colonizing healthy hosts. Here, we 
aimed at assessing the impact of host-to-host bacterial transmission on 
Escherichia coli evolution in the mammalian gut. Using an in vivo experimental 
evolution approach in mice, we found a transmission rate of 7% (±3% 2× standard 
error [2SE]) of E. coli cells per day between hosts inhabiting the same 
household. Consistent with the predictions of a simple population genetics model 
of mutation-selection-migration, the level of shared events resulting from 
within host evolution is greatly enhanced in cohoused mice, showing that hosts 
undergoing the same diet and habit are not only expected to have similar 
microbiome species compositions but also similar microbiome evolutionary 
dynamics. Furthermore, we estimated the rate of mutation accumulation of E. coli 
to be 3.0 × 10-3 (±0.8 × 10-3 2SE) mutations/genome/generation, irrespective of 
the social context of the regime. Our results reveal the impact of bacterial 
migration across hosts in shaping the adaptive evolution of new strains 
colonizing gut microbiomes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad153
PMCID: PMC10340439
PMID: 37402639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors have 
declared no competing interests.


232. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad152. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad152.

The Evolutionary History of Drosophila simulans Y Chromosomes Reveals Molecular 
Signatures of Resistance to Sex Ratio Meiotic Drive.

Courret C(1), Ogereau D(2), Gilbert C(2), Larracuente AM(1), Montchamp-Moreau 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.
(2)Laboratoire Evolution, Génome, Comportement et Ecologie, UMR UPSaclay, CNRS 
9191, IRD 247, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

The recent evolutionary history of the Y chromosome in Drosophila simulans, a 
worldwide species of Afrotropical origin, is closely linked to that of X-linked 
meiotic drivers (Paris system). The spread of the Paris drivers in natural 
populations has elicited the selection of drive-resistant Y chromosomes. To 
infer the evolutionary history of the Y chromosome in relation to the Paris 
drive, we sequenced 21 iso-Y lines, each carrying a Y chromosome from a 
different location. Among them, 13 lines carry a Y chromosome that is able to 
counteract the effect of the drivers. Despite their very different geographical 
origins, all sensitive Y's are highly similar, suggesting that they share a 
recent common ancestor. The resistant Y chromosomes are more divergent and 
segregate in four distinct clusters. The phylogeny of the Y chromosome confirms 
that the resistant lineage predates the emergence of Paris drive. The ancestry 
of the resistant lineage is further supported by the examination of Y-linked 
sequences in the sister species of D. simulans, Drosophila sechellia and 
Drosophila mauritiana. We also characterized the variation in repeat content 
among Y chromosomes and identified multiple simple satellites associated with 
resistance. Altogether, the molecular polymorphism allows us to infer the 
demographic and evolutionary history of the Y chromosome and provides new 
insights on the genetic basis of resistance.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad152
PMCID: PMC10326837
PMID: 37401458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad154. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad154.

Stepwise Evolution of E. coli C and ΦX174 Reveals Unexpected Lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS) Diversity.

Romeyer Dherbey J(1), Parab L(1), Gallie J(2), Bertels F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department Microbial Population Biology, Research Group Microbial Molecular 
Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(2)Department of Theoretical Biology, Research Group Microbial Evolutionary 
Dynamics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.

Phage therapy is a promising method for the treatment of multidrug-resistant 
bacterial infections. However, its long-term efficacy depends on understanding 
the evolutionary effects of the treatment. Current knowledge of such 
evolutionary effects is lacking, even in well-studied systems. We used the 
bacterium Escherichia coli C and its bacteriophage ΦX174, which infects cells 
using host lipopolysaccharide (LPS) molecules. We first generated 31 bacterial 
mutants resistant to ΦX174 infection. Based on the genes disrupted by these 
mutations, we predicted that these E. coli C mutants collectively produce eight 
unique LPS structures. We then developed a series of evolution experiments to 
select for ΦX174 mutants capable of infecting the resistant strains. During 
phage adaptation, we distinguished two types of phage resistance: one that was 
easily overcome by ΦX174 with few mutational steps ("easy" resistance) and one 
that was more difficult to overcome ("hard" resistance). We found that 
increasing the diversity of the host and phage populations could accelerate the 
adaptation of phage ΦX174 to overcome the hard resistance phenotype. From these 
experiments, we isolated 16 ΦX174 mutants that, together, can infect all 31 
initially resistant E. coli C mutants. Upon determining the infectivity profiles 
of these 16 evolved phages, we uncovered 14 distinct profiles. Given that only 
eight profiles are anticipated if the LPS predictions are correct, our findings 
highlight that the current understanding of LPS biology is insufficient to 
accurately forecast the evolutionary outcomes of bacterial populations infected 
by phage.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad154
PMCID: PMC10368449
PMID: 37399035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad150. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad150.

Evolutionary Shortcuts via Multinucleotide Substitutions and Their Impact on 
Natural Selection Analyses.

Lucaci AG(1), Zehr JD(1), Enard D(2), Thornton JW(3)(4), Kosakovsky Pond SL(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, Arizona.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Department of Ecology & Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

Inference and interpretation of evolutionary processes, in particular of the 
types and targets of natural selection affecting coding sequences, are 
critically influenced by the assumptions built into statistical models and 
tests. If certain aspects of the substitution process (even when they are not of 
direct interest) are presumed absent or are modeled with too crude of a 
simplification, estimates of key model parameters can become biased, often 
systematically, and lead to poor statistical performance. Previous work 
established that failing to accommodate multinucleotide (or multihit, MH) 
substitutions strongly biases dN/dS-based inference towards false-positive 
inferences of diversifying episodic selection, as does failing to model 
variation in the rate of synonymous substitution (SRV) among sites. Here, we 
develop an integrated analytical framework and software tools to simultaneously 
incorporate these sources of evolutionary complexity into selection analyses. We 
found that both MH and SRV are ubiquitous in empirical alignments, and 
incorporating them has a strong effect on whether or not positive selection is 
detected (1.4-fold reduction) and on the distributions of inferred evolutionary 
rates. With simulation studies, we show that this effect is not attributable to 
reduced statistical power caused by using a more complex model. After a detailed 
examination of 21 benchmark alignments and a new high-resolution analysis 
showing which parts of the alignment provide support for positive selection, we 
show that MH substitutions occurring along shorter branches in the tree explain 
a significant fraction of discrepant results in selection detection. Our results 
add to the growing body of literature which examines decades-old modeling 
assumptions (including MH) and finds them to be problematic for comparative 
genomic data analysis. Because multinucleotide substitutions have a significant 
impact on natural selection detection even at the level of an entire gene, we 
recommend that selection analyses of this type consider their inclusion as a 
matter of routine. To facilitate this procedure, we developed, implemented, and 
benchmarked a simple and well-performing model testing selection detection 
framework able to screen an alignment for positive selection with two 
biologically important confounding processes: site-to-site synonymous rate 
variation, and multinucleotide instantaneous substitutions.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad150
PMCID: PMC10336034
PMID: 37395787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad143. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad143.

Correction to: Conservation of the Restricted Expression of Brassicaceae 
Bsister-Like Genes in Seeds Requires a Transposable Element in Arabidopsis 
thaliana.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 13;:

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad143
PMCID: PMC10306396
PMID: 37379688


236. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad148. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad148.

Recent Evolution of a Maternally Acting Sex-Determining Supergene in a Fly with 
Single-Sex Broods.

Baird RB(1), Urban JM(2), Mongue AJ(1), Jaron KS(3), Hodson CN(4), Grewoldt 
M(5), Martin SH(1), Ross L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute Research Laboratories, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Tree of Life Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.

Sex determination is a key developmental process, yet it is remarkably variable 
across the tree of life. The dipteran family Sciaridae exhibits one of the most 
unusual sex determination systems in which mothers control offspring sex through 
selective elimination of paternal X chromosomes. Whereas in some members of the 
family females produce mixed-sex broods, others such as the dark-winged fungus 
gnat Bradysia coprophila are monogenic, with females producing single-sex 
broods. Female-producing females were previously found to be heterozygous for a 
large X-linked paracentric inversion (X'), which is maternally inherited and 
absent from male-producing females. Here, we assembled and characterized the X' 
sequence. As close sequence homology between the X and X' made identification of 
the inversion challenging, we developed a k-mer-based approach to bin genomic 
reads before assembly. We confirmed that the inversion spans most of the X' 
chromosome (∼55 Mb) and encodes ∼3,500 genes. Analysis of the divergence between 
the inversion and the homologous region of the X revealed that it originated 
very recently (<0.5 Ma). Surprisingly, we found that the X' is more complex than 
previously thought and is likely to have undergone multiple rearrangements that 
have produced regions of varying ages, resembling a supergene composed of 
evolutionary strata. We found functional degradation of ∼7.3% of genes within 
the region of recombination suppression, but no evidence of accumulation of 
repetitive elements. Our findings provide an indication that sex-linked 
inversions are driving turnover of the strange sex determination system in this 
family of flies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad148
PMCID: PMC10321493
PMID: 37352554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad147. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad147.

Independent Recruitment of Different Types of Phospholipases A2 to the Venoms of 
Caenophidian Snakes: The Rise of PLA2-IIE within Pseudoboini (Dipsadidae).

Bayona-Serrano JD(1), Grazziotin FG(2), Salazar-Valenzuela D(3), Valente RH(4), 
Nachtigall PG(1), Colombini M(5), Moura-da-Silva A(5), Junqueira-de-Azevedo 
ILM(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Toxinologia Aplicada (LETA), Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Coleções Zoológicas (LECZ), Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(3)Centro de Investigación de la Biodiversidad y Cambio Climático (BioCamb) e 
Ingeniería en Biodiversidad y Recursos Genéticos, Facultad de Ciencias del Medio 
Ambiente, Universidad Indoamérica, Quito, Ecuador.
(4)Laboratório de Toxinologia, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Imunopatologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling (CeTICS), São Paulo, 
Brazil.

Snake venoms harbor a wide and diverse array of enzymatic and nonenzymatic toxic 
components, allowing them to exert myriad effects on their prey. However, they 
appear to trend toward a few optimal compositional scaffolds, dominated by four 
major toxin classes: SVMPs, SVSPs, 3FTxs, and PLA2s. Nevertheless, the latter 
appears to be restricted to vipers and elapids, as it has never been reported as 
a major venom component in rear-fanged species. Here, by investigating the 
original transcriptomes from 19 species distributed in eight genera from the 
Pseudoboini tribe (Dipsadidae: Xenodontinae) and screening among seven 
additional tribes of Dipsadidae and three additional families of advanced 
snakes, we discovered that a novel type of venom PLA2, resembling a PLA2-IIE, 
has been recruited to the venom of some species of the Pseudoboini tribe, where 
it is a major component. Proteomic and functional analyses of these venoms 
further indicate that these PLA2s play a relevant role in the venoms from this 
tribe. Moreover, we reconstructed the phylogeny of PLA2s across different snake 
groups and show that different types of these toxins have been recruited in at 
least five independent events in caenophidian snakes. Additionally, we present 
the first compositional profiling of Pseudoboini venoms. Our results demonstrate 
how relevant phenotypic traits are convergently recruited by different means and 
from homologous and nonhomologous genes in phylogenetically and ecologically 
divergent snake groups, possibly optimizing venom composition to overcome 
diverse adaptative landscapes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad147
PMCID: PMC10321490
PMID: 37352150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad131. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad131.

Analysis of Genome-Wide Mutational Dependence in Naturally Evolving 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Populations.

Green AG(1), Vargas R(1)(2), Marin MG(1), Freschi L(1), Xie J(3), Farhat 
MR(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)Center for Computational Biomedicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Pathogenic microorganisms are in a perpetual struggle for survival in changing 
host environments, where host pressures necessitate changes in pathogen 
virulence, antibiotic resistance, or transmissibility. The genetic basis of 
phenotypic adaptation by pathogens is difficult to study in vivo. In this work, 
we develop a phylogenetic method to detect genetic dependencies that promote 
pathogen adaptation using 31,428 in vivo sampled Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
genomes, a globally prevalent bacterial pathogen with increasing levels of 
antibiotic resistance. We find that dependencies between mutations are enriched 
in antigenic and antibiotic resistance functions and discover 23 mutations that 
potentiate the development of antibiotic resistance. Between 11% and 92% of 
resistant strains harbor a dependent mutation acquired after a 
resistance-conferring variant. We demonstrate the pervasiveness of genetic 
dependency in adaptation of naturally evolving populations and the utility of 
the proposed computational approach.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad131
PMCID: PMC10292908
PMID: 37352142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad142. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad142.

A Noncoding A-to-U Kozak Site Change Related to the High Transmissibility of 
Alpha, Delta, and Omicron VOCs.

Yang J(1), Cui Y(2), Yu D(1), Zhang G(1), Cao R(1), Gu Z(1), Dai G(1), Wu X(3), 
Ling Y(1), Yi C(4), Sun X(4), Sun B(4), Lin X(1), Zhang Y(3), Zhao GP(1)(3)(5), 
Li Y(1)(6), Pan YH(2), Li H(1).

Author information:
(1)Bio-Med Big Data Center, CAS Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, 
Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and Health, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics of Ministry of Education, School 
of Life Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular 
Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(4)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Center for Excellence in Molecular Cell Science, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(5)School of Life and Health Sciences, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hangzhou, China.
(6)Guangzhou Laboratory, Guangzhou, China.

Three prevalent SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOCs) emerged and caused 
epidemic waves. It is essential to uncover advantageous mutations that cause the 
high transmissibility of VOCs. However, viral mutations are tightly linked, so 
traditional population genetic methods, including machine learning-based 
methods, cannot reliably detect mutations conferring a fitness advantage. In 
this study, we developed an approach based on the sequential occurrence order of 
mutations and the accelerated furcation rate in the pandemic-scale phylogenomic 
tree. We analyzed 3,777,753 high-quality SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences and the 
epidemiology metadata using the Coronavirus GenBrowser. We found that two 
noncoding mutations at the same position (g.a28271-/u) may be crucial to the 
high transmissibility of Alpha, Delta, and Omicron VOCs although the noncoding 
mutations alone cannot increase viral transmissibility. Both mutations cause an 
A-to-U change at the core position -3 of the Kozak sequence of the N gene and 
significantly reduce the protein expression ratio of ORF9b to N. Using a 
convergent evolutionary analysis, we found that g.a28271-/u, S:p.P681H/R, and 
N:p.R203K/M occur independently on three VOC lineages, suggesting that 
coordinated changes of S, N, and ORF9b proteins are crucial to high viral 
transmissibility. Our results provide new insights into high viral 
transmissibility co-modulated by advantageous noncoding and nonsynonymous 
changes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad142
PMCID: PMC10287536
PMID: 37341536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing interests.


240. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad146. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad146.

The Ancestral Shape of the Access Proton Path of Mitochondrial ATP Synthases 
Revealed by a Split Subunit-a.

Wong JE(1)(2), Zíková A(1)(2), Gahura O(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České 
Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice, Czech 
Republic.

The passage of protons across membranes through F1Fo-ATP synthases spins their 
rotors and drives the synthesis of ATP. While the principle of torque generation 
by proton transfer is known, the mechanisms and routes of proton access and 
release and their evolution are not fully understood. Here, we show that the 
entry site and path of protons in the lumenal half channel of mitochondrial ATP 
synthases are largely defined by a short N-terminal α-helix of subunit-a. In 
Trypanosoma brucei and other Euglenozoa, the α-helix is part of another 
polypeptide chain that is a product of subunit-a gene fragmentation. This 
α-helix and other elements forming the proton pathway are widely conserved 
across eukaryotes and in Alphaproteobacteria, the closest extant relatives of 
mitochondria, but not in other bacteria. The α-helix blocks one of two proton 
routes found in Escherichia coli, resulting in a single proton entry site in 
mitochondrial and alphaproteobacterial ATP synthases. Thus, the shape of the 
access half channel predates eukaryotes and originated in the lineage from which 
mitochondria evolved by endosymbiosis.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad146
PMCID: PMC10306403
PMID: 37338543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. They authors 
declare they have no competing interests.


241. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad145. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad145.

Uncovering the Genomic Basis of Infection Through Co-genomic Sequencing of Hosts 
and Parasites.

Dexter E(1), Fields PD(1), Ebert D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, The University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.

Understanding the genomic basis of infectious disease is a fundamental objective 
in co-evolutionary theory with relevance to healthcare, agriculture, and 
epidemiology. Models of host-parasite co-evolution often assume that infection 
requires specific combinations of host and parasite genotypes. Co-evolving host 
and parasite loci are, therefore, expected to show associations that reflect an 
underlying infection/resistance allele matrix, yet little evidence for such 
genome-to-genome interactions has been observed among natural populations. We 
conducted a study to search for this genomic signature across 258 linked host 
(Daphnia magna) and parasite (Pasteuria ramosa) genomes. Our results show a 
clear signal of genomic association between multiple epistatically interacting 
loci in the host genome, and a family of genes encoding for collagen-like 
protein in the parasite genome. These findings are supported by laboratory-based 
infection trials, which show strong correspondence between phenotype and 
genotype at the identified loci. Our study provides clear genomic evidence of 
antagonistic co-evolution among wild populations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad145
PMCID: PMC10329263
PMID: 37326294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad144. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad144.

Phylogenetic Comparative Approach Reveals Evolutionary Conservatism, Ancestral 
Composition, and Integration of Vertebrate Gut Microbiota.

Perez-Lamarque B(1)(2), Sommeria-Klein G(3), Duret L(1), Morlon H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie de l'ENS (IBENS), École Normale Supérieure, CNRS, 
INSERM, Université PSL, Paris, France.
(2)Institut de Systématique, Évolution, Biodiversité (ISYEB), Muséum national 
d'histoire naturelle, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, EPHE, UA, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Computing, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

How host-associated microbial communities evolve as their hosts diversify 
remains equivocal: how conserved is their composition? What was the composition 
of ancestral microbiota? Do microbial taxa covary in abundance over millions of 
years? Multivariate phylogenetic models of trait evolution are key to answering 
similar questions for complex host phenotypes, yet they are not directly 
applicable to relative abundances, which usually characterize microbiota. Here, 
we extend these models in this context, thereby providing a powerful approach 
for estimating phylosymbiosis (the extent to which closely related host species 
harbor similar microbiota), ancestral microbiota composition, and integration 
(evolutionary covariations in bacterial abundances). We apply our model to the 
gut microbiota of mammals and birds. We find significant phylosymbiosis that is 
not entirely explained by diet and geographic location, indicating that other 
evolutionary-conserved traits shape microbiota composition. We identify main 
shifts in microbiota composition during the evolution of the two groups and 
infer an ancestral mammalian microbiota consistent with an insectivorous diet. 
We also find remarkably consistent evolutionary covariations among bacterial 
orders in mammals and birds. Surprisingly, despite the substantial variability 
of present-day gut microbiota, some aspects of their composition are conserved 
over millions of years of host evolutionary history.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad144
PMCID: PMC10326836
PMID: 37326290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 22;40(6):msad121. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad121/7175457.

Genomic Insights into Adaptation to Karst Limestone and Incipient Speciation in 
East Asian Platycarya spp. (Juglandaceae).

Cao Y(1)(2), Almeida-Silva F(2), Zhang WP(1), Ding YM(1), Bai D(1), Bai WN(1), 
Zhang BW(1), Van de Peer Y(2)(3)(4), Zhang DY(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Process and Resource Ecology and 
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity Science and Ecological 
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 
100875, China.
(2)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University and 
VIB - Center for Plant Systems Biology, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Center for Microbial Ecology and Genomics, Department of Biochemistry, 
Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(4)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

When challenged by similar environmental conditions, phylogenetically distant 
taxa often independently evolve similar traits (convergent evolution). 
Meanwhile, adaptation to extreme habitats might lead to divergence between taxa 
that are otherwise closely related. These processes have long existed in the 
conceptual sphere, yet molecular evidence, especially for woody perennials, is 
scarce. The karst endemic Platycarya longipes, and its only congeneric species, 
P. strobilacea, which is widely distributed in the mountains in East Asia, 
provide an ideal model for examining the molecular basis of both convergent 
evolution and speciation. Using chromosome-level genome assemblies of both 
species, and whole genome resequencing data from 207 individuals spanning their 
entire distribution range, we demonstrate that P. longipes and P. strobilacea 
form two species-specific clades, which diverged around 2.09 million years ago. 
We find an excess of genomic regions exhibiting extreme interspecific 
differentiation, potentially due to long-term selection in P. longipes, likely 
contributing to the incipient speciation of the genus Platycarya. Interestingly, 
our results unveil underlying karst adaptation in both copies of the calcium 
influx channel gene TPC1 in P. longipes. TPC1 has previously been identified as 
a selective target in certain karst-endemic herbs, indicating a convergent 
adaptation to high calcium stress among karst-endemic species. Our study reveals 
the genic convergence of TPC1 among karst endemics, and the driving forces 
underneath the incipient speciation of the two Platycarya lineages.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad121/7175457
PMID: 37325551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad130. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad130.

Major Genetic Risk Factors for Dupuytren's Disease Are Inherited From 
Neandertals.

Ågren R(1), Patil S(2), Zhou X(2); FinnGen.; Sahlholm K(1)(3), Pääbo S(4)(5), 
Zeberg H(1)(4)(5).

Collaborators: Palotie A, Daly M, Riley-Gills B, Jacob H, Paul D, Matakidou A, 
Platt A, Runz H, John S, Okafo G, Lawless N, Plenge R, Maranville J, McCarthy M, 
Hunkapiller J, Ehm MG, Auro K, Longerich S, Fox C, Mälarstig A, Klinger K, 
Raipal D, Green E, Graham R, Yang R, ÓDonnell C, Mäkelä T, Kaprio J, Virolainen 
P, Hakanen A, Kilpi T, Perola M, Partanen J, Pitkäranta A, Junttila J, Serpi R, 
Laitinen T, Kosma VM, Laukkanen J, Hautalahti M, Tuovila O, Pakkanen R, Waring 
J, Riley-Gillis B, Rahimov F, Tachmazidou I, Chen CY, Runz H, Ding Z, Jung M, 
Biswas S, Pendergrass R, Hunkapiller J, Ehm MG, Pulford D, Raghavan N, 
Huertas-Vazquez A, Sul JH, Mälarstig A, Hu X, Klinger K, Graham R, Green E, 
Mozaffari S, Waterworth D, Renaud N, Obeidat M, Ripatti S, Schleutker J, Perola 
M, Arvas M, Carpén O, Hinttala R, Kettunen J, Mannermaa A, Aalto-Setälä K, 
Kähönen M, Laukkanen J, Mäkelä J, Kälviäinen R, Julkunen V, Soininen H, Remes A, 
Hiltunen M, Peltola J, Raivio M, Tienari P, Rinne J, Kallionpää R, Partanen J, 
Abbasi A, Ziemann A, Smaoui N, Lehtonen A, Eaton S, Runz H, Lahdenperä S, Biswas 
S, Hunkapiller J, Bowers N, Teng E, Pendergrass R, Xu F, Pulford D, Auro K, 
Addis L, Eicher J, Li QS, He K, Khramtsova E, Raghavan N, Färkkilä M, Koskela J, 
Pikkarainen S, Jussila A, Kaukinen K, Blomster T, Kiviniemi M, Voutilainen M, 
Daly M, Abbasi A, Waring J, Smaoui N, Rahimov F, Lehtonen A, Lu T, Bowers N, 
Pendergrass R, McCarthy L, Hart A, Guan M, Miller J, Kalpala K, Miller M, Hu X, 
Eklund K, Palomäki A, Isomäki P, Pirilä L, Kaipiainen-Seppänen O, Huhtakangas J, 
Mars N, Abbasi A, Waring J, Rahimov F, Lertratanakul A, Smaoui N, Lehtonen A, 
Close D, Hochfeld M, Bowers N, Pendergrass R, Gordillo JE, Auro K, Waterworth D, 
Farias F, Kalpala K, Bing N, Hu X, Laitinen T, Pelkonen M, Kauppi P, 
Kankaanranta H, Harju T, Lahesmaa R, Smaoui N, Mackay A, Lassi G, Eaton S, Chen 
H, Pendergrass R, Bowers N, Betts J, Auro K, Mishra R, Mouded M, Ngo D, Niiranen 
T, Vaura F, Salomaa V, Metsärinne K, Aittokallio J, Kähönen M, Hernesniemi J, 
Gordin D, Sinisalo J, Taskinen MR, Tuomi T, Hiltunen T, Laukkanen J, Elliott A, 
Reeve MP, Ruotsalainen S, Challis B, Paul D, Hunkapiller J, Bowers N, 
Pendergrass R, Chu A, Auro K, Reilly D, Mendelson M, Parkkinen J, Miller M, 
Meretoja T, Joensuu H, Carpén O, Mattson J, Salminen E, Auranen A, Karihtala P, 
Auvinen P, Elenius K, Schleutker J, Pitkänen E, Mars N, Daly M, Popovic R, 
Waring J, Riley-Gillis B, Lehtonen A, Schutzman J, Hunkapiller J, Bowers N, 
Pendergrass R, Kulkarni D, Auro K, Porello A, Loboda A, Lehtonen H, McDonough S, 
Vuoti S, Kaarniranta K, Turunen JA, Ollila T, Uusitalo H, Karjalainen J, 
Pitkänen E, Liu M, Runz H, Loomis S, Strauss E, Bowers N, Chen H, Pendergrass R, 
Tasanen K, Huilaja L, Hannula-Jouppi K, Salmi T, Peltonen S, Koulu L, Smaoui N, 
Rahimov F, Lehtonen A, Choy D, Pendergrass R, Waterworth D, Kalpala K, Wu Y, 
Pussinen P, Salminen A, Salo T, Rice D, Nieminen P, Palotie U, Siponen M, 
Suominen L, Mäntylä P, Gursoy U, Anttonen V, Sipilä K, Pendergrass R, Laivuori 
H, Kurra V, Kotaniemi-Talonen L, Heikinheimo O, Kalliala I, Aaltonen L, Jokimaa 
V, Kettunen J, Vääräsmäki M, Uimari O, Morin-Papunen L, Niinimäki M, Piltonen T, 
Kivinen K, Widen E, Tukiainen T, Reeve MP, Daly M, Välimäki N, Laakkonen E, 
Tyrmi J, Silven H, Sliz E, Arffman R, Savukoski S, Laisk T, Pujol N, Liu M, 
Riley-Gillis B, Pendergrass R, Kumar J, Auro K, Hovatta I, Chen CY, Isometsä E, 
Veerapen K, Ollila H, Suvisaari J, Als TD, Mäkitie A, Bizaki-Vallaskangas A, 
Toppila-Salmi S, Willberg T, Saarentaus E, Aarnisalo A, Salminen E, Rahikkala E, 
Kettunen J, Aittomäki K, Åberg F, Kurki M, Ripatti S, Daly M, Karjalainen J, 
Havulinna A, Mehtonen J, Palta P, Hassan S, Parolo PDB, Zhou W, Maasha M, 
Veerapen K, Hassan S, Lemmelä S, Rivas M, Niemi ME, Palotie A, Liu A, Lehisto A, 
Ganna A, Llorens V, Laivuori H, Tukiainen T, Reeve MP, Heyne H, Mars N, Rämö J, 
Saarentaus E, Ollila H, Rodosthenous R, Strausz S, Palotie T, Palin K, 
Garcia-Tabuenca J, Siirtola H, Kiiskinen T, Lee J, Tsuo K, Elliott A, 
Kristiansson K, Arvas M, Hyvärinen K, Ritari J, Carpén O, Kettunen J, Pylkäs K, 
Sliz E, Karjalainen M, Mantere T, Kangasniemi E, Heikkinen S, Mannermaa A, 
Laakkonen E, Pitkänen N, Lessard S, Chatelain C, Terho P, Soini S, Partanen J, 
Punkka E, Serpi R, Siltanen S, Kosma VM, Kuopio T, Jalanko A, Shen HY, Kajanne 
R, Aavikko M, Kurki M, Karjalainen J, Parolo PDB, Lehisto A, Mehtonen J, Zhou W, 
Kanai M, Maasha M, Veerapen K, Laivuori H, Havulinna A, Lemmelä S, Kiiskinen T, 
Lahtela LE, Kaunisto M, Kilpeläinen E, Sipilä TP, Dada OA, Ghazal A, Kytölä A, 
Weldatsadik R, Donner K, Sipilä TP, Loukola A, Laiho P, Sistonen T, Kaiharju E, 
Laukkanen M, Järvensivu E, Lähteenmäki S, Männikkö L, Wong R, Toivola A, 
Brunfeldt M, Mattsson H, Kristiansson K, Lemmelä S, Koskelainen S, Hiekkalinna 
T, Paajanen T, Palta P, Pärn K, Kals M, Luo S, Sinha V, Laitinen T, Reeve MP, 
Niemi M, Veerapen K, Siirtola H, Gracia-Tabuenca J, Helminen M, Luukkaala T, 
Vähätalo I, Pitkänen J, Hautalahti M, Mäkelä J, Smith S, Southerington T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Integrative Medical Biology, Wallenberg Centre for Molecular 
Medicine, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Human Evolutionary Genomics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and 
Technology, Okinawa, Japan.

Dupuytren's disease is characterized by fingers becoming permanently bent in a 
flexed position. Whereas people of African ancestry are rarely afflicted by 
Dupuytren's disease, up to ∼30% of men over 60 years suffer from this condition 
in northern Europe. Here, we meta-analyze 3 biobanks comprising 7,871 cases and 
645,880 controls and find 61 genome-wide significant variants associated with 
Dupuytren's disease. We show that 3 of the 61 loci harbor alleles of Neandertal 
origin, including the second and third most strongly associated ones (P = 6.4 × 
10-132 and P = 9.2 × 10-69, respectively). For the most strongly associated 
Neandertal variant, we identify EPDR1 as the causal gene. Dupuytren's disease is 
an example of how admixture with Neandertals has shaped regional differences in 
disease prevalence.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad130
PMCID: PMC10266526
PMID: 37315093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad140. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad140.

A Quantitative Theory for Genomic Offset Statistics.

Gain C(1), Rhoné B(2)(3), Cubry P(2), Salazar I(4), Forbes F(4), Vigouroux Y(2), 
Jay F(5), François O(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université Grenoble-Alpes, 
Grenoble INP, TIMC UMR 5525, 38000 Grenoble, France.
(2)DIADE, Université de Montpellier, Institut de Recherche pour le 
Développement, French Agricultural Research Centre for International Development 
(CIRAD), Montpellier, France.
(3)UMR AGAP Institut, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, INRAE, Institut Agro, 
Montpellier, France.
(4)Université Grenoble-Alpes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Grenoble INP, Inria Grenoble - Rhône-Alpes, LJK UMR 5224, 655 Avenue de 
l'Europe, 38335 Montbonnot, France.
(5)Université Paris-Saclay, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Inria, 
Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Numérique, UMR 9015, Orsay, 
France.

Genomic offset statistics predict the maladaptation of populations to rapid 
habitat alteration based on association of genotypes with environmental 
variation. Despite substantial evidence for empirical validity, genomic offset 
statistics have well-identified limitations, and lack a theory that would 
facilitate interpretations of predicted values. Here, we clarified the 
theoretical relationships between genomic offset statistics and unobserved 
fitness traits controlled by environmentally selected loci and proposed a 
geometric measure to predict fitness after rapid change in local environment. 
The predictions of our theory were verified in computer simulations and in 
empirical data on African pearl millet (Cenchrus americanus) obtained from a 
common garden experiment. Our results proposed a unified perspective on genomic 
offset statistics and provided a theoretical foundation necessary when 
considering their potential application in conservation management in the face 
of environmental change.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad140
PMCID: PMC10306404
PMID: 37307566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad139. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad139.

Versatile Detection of Diverse Selective Sweeps with Flex-Sweep.

Lauterbur ME(1), Munch K(2), Enard D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ.
(2)Bioinformatics Research Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.

Understanding the impacts of selection pressures influencing modern-day genomic 
diversity is a major goal of evolutionary genomics. In particular, the 
contribution of selective sweeps to adaptation remains an open question, with 
persistent statistical limitations on the power and specificity of sweep 
detection methods. Sweeps with subtle genomic signals have been particularly 
challenging to detect. Although many existing methods powerfully detect specific 
types of sweeps and/or those with strong signals, their power comes at the 
expense of versatility. We present Flex-sweep, a machine learning-based tool 
designed to detect sweeps with a variety of subtle signals, including those 
thousands of generations old. It is especially valuable for nonmodel organisms, 
for which we have neither expectations about the overall characteristics of 
sweeps nor outgroups with population-level sequencing to otherwise facilitate 
detecting very old sweeps. We show that Flex-sweep has the power to detect 
sweeps with subtle signals, even in the face of demographic model 
misspecification, recombination rate heterogeneity, and background selection. 
Flex-sweep detects sweeps up to 0.125*4Ne generations old, including those that 
are weak, soft, and/or incomplete; it can also detect strong, complete sweeps up 
to 0.25*4Ne generations old. We apply Flex-sweep to the 1000 Genomes Yoruba data 
set and, in addition to recovering previously identified sweeps, show that 
sweeps disproportionately occur within genic regions and are close to regulatory 
regions. In addition, we show that virus-interacting proteins (VIPs) are 
strongly enriched for selective sweeps, recapitulating previous results that 
demonstrate the importance of viruses as a driver of adaptive evolution in 
humans.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad139
PMCID: PMC10287538
PMID: 37307561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad137. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad137.

Cytoplasmic Polyadenylation Is an Ancestral Hallmark of Early Development in 
Animals.

Rouhana L(1), Edgar A(2), Hugosson F(2), Dountcheva V(1), Martindale MQ(2)(3), 
Ryan JF(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Whitney Laboratory for Marine Bioscience, University of Florida, St. 
Augustine, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

Differential regulation of gene expression has produced the astonishing 
diversity of life on Earth. Understanding the origin and evolution of 
mechanistic innovations for control of gene expression is therefore integral to 
evolutionary and developmental biology. Cytoplasmic polyadenylation is the 
biochemical extension of polyadenosine at the 3'-end of cytoplasmic mRNAs. This 
process regulates the translation of specific maternal transcripts and is 
mediated by the Cytoplasmic Polyadenylation Element-Binding Protein family 
(CPEBs). Genes that code for CPEBs are amongst a very few that are present in 
animals but missing in nonanimal lineages. Whether cytoplasmic polyadenylation 
is present in non-bilaterian animals (i.e., sponges, ctenophores, placozoans, 
and cnidarians) remains unknown. We have conducted phylogenetic analyses of 
CPEBs, and our results show that CPEB1 and CPEB2 subfamilies originated in the 
animal stem lineage. Our assessment of expression in the sea anemone, 
Nematostella vectensis (Cnidaria), and the comb jelly, Mnemiopsis leidyi 
(Ctenophora), demonstrates that maternal expression of CPEB1 and the catalytic 
subunit of the cytoplasmic polyadenylation machinery (GLD2) is an ancient 
feature that is conserved across animals. Furthermore, our measurements of 
poly(A)-tail elongation reveal that key targets of cytoplasmic polyadenylation 
are shared between vertebrates, cnidarians, and ctenophores, indicating that 
this mechanism orchestrates a regulatory network that is conserved throughout 
animal evolution. We postulate that cytoplasmic polyadenylation through CPEBs 
was a fundamental innovation that contributed to animal evolution from 
unicellular life.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad137
PMCID: PMC10284499
PMID: 37288606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad138. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad138.

Body-Plan Reorganization in a Sponge Correlates with Microbiome Change.

Vargas S(1), Leiva L(1), Eitel M(1), Curdt F(2), Rohde S(2), Arnold C(3), Nickel 
M(3), Schupp P(2)(4), Orsi WD(1)(5), Adamska M(6), Wörheide G(1)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Palaeontology & Geobiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Germany.
(2)Department of Environmental Biochemistry, Institute for Chemistry and Biology 
of the Marine Environment Terramare, Carl-von-Ossietzky University Oldenburg, 
Wilhemshaven, Germany.
(3)Institut für Spezielle Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, 
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität, Jena, Germany.
(4)Helmholtz Institute for Functional Marine Biodiversity, Carl-von-Ossietzky 
University Oldenburg, Wilhemshaven, Germany.
(5)GeoBio-Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Germany.
(6)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, 
Australia.
(7)SNSB-Bayerische Staatssammlung für Paläontologie und Geologie, München, 
Germany.

Mounting evidence suggests that animals and their associated bacteria interact 
via intricate molecular mechanisms, and it is hypothesized that disturbances to 
the microbiome influence animal development. Here, we show that the loss of a 
key photosymbiont (i.e., bleaching) upon shading correlates with a stark 
body-plan reorganization in the common aquarium cyanosponge Lendenfeldia 
chondrodes. The morphological changes observed in shaded sponges include the 
development of a thread-like morphology that contrasts with the flattened, 
foliose morphology of control specimens. The microanatomy of shaded sponges 
markedly differed from that of control sponges, with shaded specimens lacking a 
well-developed cortex and choanosome. Also, the palisade of polyvacuolar 
gland-like cells typical in control specimens was absent in shaded sponges. The 
morphological changes observed in shaded specimens are coupled with broad 
transcriptomic changes and include the modulation of signaling pathways involved 
in animal morphogenesis and immune response, such as the Wnt, transforming 
growth factor β (TGF-β), and TLR-ILR pathways. This study provides a genetic, 
physiological, and morphological assessment of the effect of microbiome changes 
on sponge postembryonic development and homeostasis. The correlated response of 
the sponge host to the collapse of the population of symbiotic cyanobacteria 
provides evidence for a coupling between the sponge transcriptomic state and the 
state of its microbiome. This coupling suggests that the ability of animals to 
interact with their microbiomes and respond to microbiome perturbations has deep 
evolutionary origins in this group.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad138
PMCID: PMC10308213
PMID: 37288516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad136. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad136.

Not Quite Lost in Translation: Mistranslation Alters Adaptive Landscape 
Topography and the Dynamics of Evolution.

Schmutzer M(1)(2), Wagner A(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA.

Mistranslation-the erroneous incorporation of amino acids into nascent 
proteins-is a source of protein variation that is orders of magnitude more 
frequent than DNA mutation. Like other sources of nongenetic variation, it can 
affect adaptive evolution. We study the evolutionary consequences of 
mistranslation with experimental data on mistranslation rates applied to three 
empirical adaptive landscapes. We find that mistranslation generally flattens 
adaptive landscapes by reducing the fitness of high fitness genotypes and 
increasing that of low fitness genotypes, but it does not affect all genotypes 
equally. Most importantly, it increases genetic variation available to selection 
by rendering many neutral DNA mutations nonneutral. Mistranslation also renders 
some beneficial mutations deleterious and vice versa. It increases the 
probability of fixation of 3-8% of beneficial mutations. Even though 
mistranslation increases the incidence of epistasis, it also allows populations 
evolving on a rugged landscape to evolve modestly higher fitness. Our 
observations show that mistranslation is an important source of nongenetic 
variation that can affect adaptive evolution on fitness landscapes in multiple 
ways.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad136
PMCID: PMC10280143
PMID: 37283551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad127. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad127.

Correction: Sex Differences in 20-Hydroxyecdysone Hormone Levels Control Sexual 
Dimorphism in Bicyclus anynana Wing Patterns.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2018 Feb 1;35(2):465-472.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad127
PMCID: PMC10243996
PMID: 37279953


251. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad134. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad134.

A Novel Group of Dynamin-Related Proteins Shared by Eukaryotes and Giant Viruses 
Is Able to Remodel Mitochondria From Within the Matrix.

Sheikh S(1)(2), Pánek T(3), Gahura O(1), Týč J(1), Záhonová K(1)(4)(5), Lukeš 
J(1)(2), Eliáš M(5), Hashimi H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České 
Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, 
Vestec, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.

The diverse GTPases of the dynamin superfamily play various roles in the cell, 
as exemplified by the dynamin-related proteins (DRPs) Mgm1 and Opa1, which 
remodel the mitochondrial inner membrane in fungi and metazoans, respectively. 
Via an exhaustive search of genomic and metagenomic databases, we found 
previously unknown DRP types occurring in diverse eukaryotes and giant viruses 
(phylum Nucleocytoviricota). One novel DRP clade, termed MidX, combined hitherto 
uncharacterized proteins from giant viruses and six distantly related eukaryote 
taxa (Stramenopiles, Telonemia, Picozoa, Amoebozoa, Apusomonadida, and 
Choanoflagellata). MidX stood out because it was not only predicted to be 
mitochondria-targeted but also to assume a tertiary structure not observed in 
other DRPs before. To understand how MidX affects mitochondria, we exogenously 
expressed MidX from Hyperionvirus in the kinetoplastid Trypanosoma brucei, which 
lacks Mgm1 or Opa1 orthologs. MidX massively affected mitochondrial morphology 
from inside the matrix, where it closely associates with the inner membrane. 
This unprecedented mode of action contrasts to those of Mgm1 and Opa1, which 
mediate inner membrane remodeling in the intermembrane space. We speculate that 
MidX was acquired in Nucleocytoviricota evolution by horizontal gene transfer 
from eukaryotes and is used by giant viruses to remodel host mitochondria during 
infection. MidX's unique structure may be an adaptation for reshaping 
mitochondria from the inside. Finally, Mgm1 forms a sister group to MidX and not 
Opa1 in our phylogenetic analysis, throwing into question the long-presumed 
homology of these DRPs with similar roles in sister lineages.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad134
PMCID: PMC10280142
PMID: 37279941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad133. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad133.

Bivalves Present the Largest and Most Diversified Repertoire of Toll-Like 
Receptors in the Animal Kingdom, Suggesting Broad-Spectrum Pathogen Recognition 
in Marine Waters.

Saco A(1), Novoa B(1), Greco S(2), Gerdol M(2), Figueras A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Marine Research (IIM), National Research Council (CSIC), Vigo, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are the most widespread class of membrane-bound 
innate immune receptors, responsible of specific pathogen recognition and 
production of immune effectors through the activation of intracellular signaling 
cascades. The repertoire of TLRs was analyzed in 85 metazoans, enriched on 
molluscan species, an underrepresented phylum in previous studies. Following an 
ancient evolutionary origin, suggested by the presence of TLR genes in Anthozoa 
(Cnidaria), these receptors underwent multiple independent gene family 
expansions, the most significant of which occurred in bivalve molluscs. Marine 
mussels (Mytilus spp.) had the largest TLR repertoire in the animal kingdom, 
with evidence of several lineage-specific expanded TLR subfamilies with 
different degrees of orthology conservation within bivalves. Phylogenetic 
analyses revealed that bivalve TLR repertoires were more diversified than their 
counterparts in deuterostomes or ecdysozoans. The complex evolutionary history 
of TLRs, characterized by lineage-specific expansions and losses, along with 
episodic positive selection acting on the extracellular recognition domains, 
suggests that functional diversification might be a leading evolutionary force. 
We analyzed a comprehensive transcriptomic data set from Mytilus 
galloprovincialis and built transcriptomic correlation clusters with the TLRs 
expressed in gills and in hemocytes. The implication of specific TLRs in 
different immune pathways was evidenced, as well as their specific modulation in 
response to different biotic and abiotic stimuli. We propose that, in a similar 
fashion to the remarkable functional specialization of vertebrate TLRs, the 
expansion of the TLR gene family in bivalves attends to a functional 
specification motivated by the biological particularities of these organisms and 
their living environment.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad133
PMCID: PMC10279657
PMID: 37279919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad124. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad124.

Fixed Allele Differences Associated With the Centromere Reveal Chromosome 
Morphology and Rearrangements in a Reptile (Varanus acanthurus BOULENGER).

Dobry J(1), Zhu Z(2), Zhou Q(2)(3)(4), Wapstra E(5), Deakin JE(1), Ezaz T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia.
(2)MOE Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis and Protection and Zhejiang 
Provincial Key Laboratory for Cancer Molecular Cell Biology, Life Sciences 
Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Center for Reproductive Medicine, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Evolutionary & Organismal Biology Research Center, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(5)School of Natural Sciences, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia.

Chromosome rearrangements are often implicated with genomic divergence and are 
proposed to be associated with species evolution. Rearrangements alter the 
genomic structure and interfere with homologous recombination by isolating a 
portion of the genome. Integration of multiplatform next-generation DNA 
sequencing technologies has enabled putative identification of chromosome 
rearrangements in many taxa; however, integrating these data sets with 
cytogenetics is still uncommon beyond model genetic organisms. Therefore, to 
achieve the ultimate goal for the genomic classification of eukaryotic 
organisms, physical chromosome mapping remains critical. The ridge-tailed 
goannas (Varanus acanthurus BOULENGER) are a group of dwarf monitor lizards 
comprised of several species found throughout northern Australia. These lizards 
exhibit extreme divergence at both the genic and chromosomal levels. The 
chromosome polymorphisms are widespread extending across much of their 
distribution, raising the question if these polymorphisms are homologous within 
the V. acanthurus complex. We used a combined genomic and cytogenetic approach 
to test for homology across divergent populations with morphologically similar 
chromosome rearrangements. We showed that more than one chromosome pair was 
involved with the widespread rearrangements. This finding provides evidence to 
support de novo chromosome rearrangements have occurred within populations. 
These chromosome rearrangements are characterized by fixed allele differences 
originating in the vicinity of the centromeric region. We then compared this 
region with several other assembled genomes of reptiles, chicken, and the 
platypus. We demonstrated that the synteny of genes in Reptilia remains 
conserved despite centromere repositioning across these taxa.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad124
PMCID: PMC10257493
PMID: 37279881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad125. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad125.

Comparative Venom Multiomics Reveal the Molecular Mechanisms Driving Adaptation 
to Diverse Predator-Prey Ecosystems in Closely Related Sea Snakes.

Zheng H(1)(2), Wang J(1), Fan H(1), Wang S(2), Ye R(2), Li L(2), Wang S(1), Li 
A(1)(3), Lu Y(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Medicine, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Health Toxicology, Faculty of Naval Medicine, Naval Medical 
University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Biochemical Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Naval Medical 
University, Shanghai, China.

Predator-prey arms races are ideal models for studying the natural selection and 
adaptive evolution that drive the formation of biological diversity. For 
venomous snakes, venom is a key bridge linking snakes with their prey, but 
whether and how venom evolves under the selection of diet remains unclear. Here, 
we focused on two closely related sea snakes, Hydrophis cyanocinctus and 
Hydrophis curtus, which show significant differences in prey preferences. 
Data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based proteomic analysis revealed different 
degrees of homogeneity in the venom composition of the two snakes, which was 
consistent with the differential phylogenetic diversity of their prey. By 
investigating the sequences and structures of three-finger toxins (3FTx), a 
predominant toxin family in elapid venom, we identified significant differences 
between the two sea snakes in the binding activity of 3FTx to receptors from 
different prey populations, which could explain the trophic specialization of H. 
cyanocinctus. Furthermore, we performed integrated multiomic profiling of the 
transcriptomes, microRNAs (miRNAs), long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), and proteomes 
of the venom glands; constructed venom-related mRNA-miRNA-lncRNA networks; and 
identified a series of noncoding RNAs involved in the regulation of toxin gene 
expression in the two species. These findings are highly informative for 
elucidating the molecular basis and regulatory mechanisms that account for 
discrepant venom evolution in response to divergent diets in closely related 
snakes, providing valuable evidence for the study of coselection and coevolution 
in predator-prey ecosystems.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad125
PMCID: PMC10265070
PMID: 37279580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad132. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad132.

Decoding the Fundamental Drivers of Phylodynamic Inference.

Featherstone LA(1), Duchene S(1), Vaughan TG(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for 
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zurich, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Despite its increasing role in the understanding of infectious disease 
transmission at the applied and theoretical levels, phylodynamics lacks a 
well-defined notion of ideal data and optimal sampling. We introduce a method to 
visualize and quantify the relative impact of pathogen genome sequence and 
sampling times-two fundamental sources of data for phylodynamics under 
birth-death-sampling models-to understand how each drives phylodynamic 
inference. Applying our method to simulated data and real-world SARS-CoV-2 and 
H1N1 Influenza data, we use this insight to elucidate fundamental trade-offs and 
guidelines for phylodynamic analyses to draw the most from sequence data. 
Phylodynamics promises to be a staple of future responses to infectious disease 
threats globally. Continuing research into the inherent requirements and 
trade-offs of phylodynamic data and inference will help ensure phylodynamic 
tools are wielded in ever more targeted and efficient ways.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad132
PMCID: PMC10284498
PMID: 37264694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jul 5;40(7):msad128. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad128.

Accelerated Evolution Analysis Uncovers PKNOX2 as a Key Transcription Factor in 
the Mammalian Cochlea.

Trigila AP(1), Castagna VC(2), Berasain L(1), Montini D(1), Rubinstein M(1)(3), 
Gomez-Casati ME(2), Franchini LF(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular 
(INGEBI), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Facultad de Medicina, Instituto de Farmacología, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Departamento de Fisiología, Biología Molecular y Celular, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

The genetic bases underlying the evolution of morphological and functional 
innovations of the mammalian inner ear are poorly understood. Gene regulatory 
regions are thought to play an important role in the evolution of form and 
function. To uncover crucial hearing genes whose regulatory machinery evolved 
specifically in mammalian lineages, we mapped accelerated noncoding elements 
(ANCEs) in inner ear transcription factor (TF) genes and found that PKNOX2 
harbors the largest number of ANCEs within its transcriptional unit. Using 
reporter gene expression assays in transgenic zebrafish, we determined that four 
PKNOX2-ANCEs drive differential expression patterns when compared with ortholog 
sequences from close outgroup species. Because the functional role of PKNOX2 in 
cochlear hair cells has not been previously investigated, we decided to study 
Pknox2 null mice generated by CRISPR/Cas9 technology. We found that Pknox2-/- 
mice exhibit reduced distortion product otoacoustic emissions (DPOAEs) and 
auditory brainstem response (ABR) thresholds at high frequencies together with 
an increase in peak 1 amplitude, consistent with a higher number of inner hair 
cells (IHCs)-auditory nerve synapsis observed at the cochlear basal region. A 
comparative cochlear transcriptomic analysis of Pknox2-/- and Pknox2+/+ mice 
revealed that key auditory genes are under Pknox2 control. Hence, we report that 
PKNOX2 plays a critical role in cochlear sensitivity at higher frequencies and 
that its transcriptional regulation underwent lineage-specific evolution in 
mammals. Our results provide novel insights about the contribution of PKNOX2 to 
normal auditory function and to the evolution of high-frequency hearing in 
mammals.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad128
PMCID: PMC10337857
PMID: 37247388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad129. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad129.

The Role of Introgression During the Radiation of Endemic Fishes Adapted to 
Living at Extreme Altitudes in the Tibetan Plateau.

Qian Y(1)(2)(3)(4), Meng M(5), Zhou C(6)(7), Liu H(8), Jiang H(9), Xu Y(10), 
Chen W(1)(4), Ding Z(1), Liu Y(1), Gong X(1)(4), Wang C(1)(4), Lei Y(1), Wang 
T(11), Wang Y(3)(12), Gan X(1), Meyer A(13), He S(1)(3)(14), Yang L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of 
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Plateau Ecology and Agriculture, Qinghai University, 
Xining, China.
(3)Academy of Plateau Science and Sustainability, Qinghai Normal University, 
Xining, China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology (MOE), College of Horticulture 
and Forestry Sciences, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(6)College of Fisheries, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development, Ministry of 
Education, Key Laboratory of Aquatics Science of Chongqing, Chongqing, China.
(8)Integrative Science Center of Germplasm Creation in Western China (CHONGQING) 
Science City, Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development 
(Ministry of Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School 
of Life Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(9)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, China.
(10)South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(11)Gansu Key Laboratory of Cold Water Fishes Germplasm Resources and Genetics 
Breeding, Gansu Fisheries Research Institute, Lanzhou, China.
(12)Hubei Engineering Research Center for Protection and Utilization of Special 
Biological Resources in the Hanjiang River Basin, School of Life Sciences, 
Jianghan University, Wuhan, China.
(13)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
(14)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Recent genomic analyses of evolutionary radiations suggest that ancient 
introgression may facilitate rapid diversification and adaptive radiation. The 
loach genus Triplophysa, a genus with most species endemic to Tibetan Plateau, 
shows ecological diversity and rapid evolution and represents a potential 
example of adaptive radiation linked to the uplift of the Tibetan Plateau. Here, 
we interrogate the complex evolutionary history of Triplophysa fishes through 
the analysis of whole-genome sequences. By reconstructing the phylogeny of 
Triplophysa, quantifying introgression across this clade, and simulating 
speciation and migration processes, we confirm that extensive gene flow events 
occurred across disparate Triplophysa species. Our results suggest that 
introgression plays a more substantial role than incomplete lineage sorting in 
underpinning phylogenetic discordance in Triplophysa. The results also indicate 
that genomic regions affected by ancient gene flow exhibit characteristics of 
lower recombination rates and nucleotide diversity and may associate with 
selection. Simulation analysis of Triplophysa tibetana suggests that the species 
may have been affected by the Gonghe Movement in the third uplift of the Tibetan 
Plateau, resulting in founder effects and a subsequent reduction in Ne.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad129
PMCID: PMC10297026
PMID: 37247387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad126. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad126.

Protection of Catalytic Cofactors by Polypeptides as a Driver for the Emergence 
of Primordial Enzymes.

Gutierrez-Rus LI(1), Gamiz-Arco G(1), Gavira JA(2), Gaucher EA(3), Risso VA(1), 
Sanchez-Ruiz JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Quimica Fisica, Facultad de Ciencias, Unidad de Excelencia de 
Quimica Aplicada a Biomedicina y Medioambiente (UEQ), Universidad de Granada, 
Granada, Spain.
(2)Laboratorio de Estudios Cristalograficos, Instituto Andaluz de Ciencias de la 
Tierra, CSIC, Unidad de Excelencia de Quimica Aplicada a Biomedicina y 
Medioambiente (UEQ), Universidad de Granada, Granada, Armilla, Spain.
(3)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Mar 14;:

Enzymes catalyze the chemical reactions of life. For nearly half of known 
enzymes, catalysis requires the binding of small molecules known as cofactors. 
Polypeptide-cofactor complexes likely formed at a primordial stage and became 
starting points for the evolution of many efficient enzymes. Yet, evolution has 
no foresight so the driver for the primordial complex formation is unknown. 
Here, we use a resurrected ancestral TIM-barrel protein to identify one 
potential driver. Heme binding at a flexible region of the ancestral structure 
yields a peroxidation catalyst with enhanced efficiency when compared to free 
heme. This enhancement, however, does not arise from protein-mediated promotion 
of catalysis. Rather, it reflects the protection of bound heme from common 
degradation processes and a resulting longer lifetime and higher effective 
concentration for the catalyst. Protection of catalytic cofactors by 
polypeptides emerges as a general mechanism to enhance catalysis and may have 
plausibly benefited primordial polypeptide-cofactor associations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad126
PMCID: PMC10279418
PMID: 37235753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad123. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad123.

The Fitness Effects of Codon Composition of the Horizontally Transferred 
Antibiotic Resistance Genes Intensify at Sub-lethal Antibiotic Levels.

Shaferman M(1), Gencel M(2), Alon N(1), Alasad K(1), Rotblat B(1)(3), Serohijos 
AWR(2)(4), Alfonta L(1)(5), Bershtein S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 
Israel.
(2)Departement de Biochimie, Universite de Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, National Institute for Biotechnology in 
the Negev (NIBN), Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(4)Centre Robert-Cedergren en Bio-informatique et Genomique, Universite de 
Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 
Israel.

The rampant variability in codon bias existing between bacterial genomes is 
expected to interfere with horizontal gene transfer (HGT), a phenomenon that 
drives bacterial adaptation. However, delineating the constraints imposed by 
codon bias on functional integration of the transferred genes is complicated by 
multiple genomic and functional barriers controlling HGT, and by the dependence 
of the evolutionary outcomes of HGT on the host's environment. Here, we designed 
an experimental system in which codon composition of the transferred genes is 
the only variable triggering fitness change of the host. We replaced Escherichia 
coli's chromosomal folA gene encoding dihydrofolate reductase, an essential 
enzyme that constitutes a target for trimethoprim, with combinatorial libraries 
of synonymous codons of folA genes from trimethoprim-sensitive Listeria grayi 
and trimethoprim-resistant Neisseria sicca. The resulting populations underwent 
selection at a range of trimethoprim concentrations, and the ensuing changes in 
variant frequencies were used to infer the fitness effects of the individual 
combinations of codons. We found that when HGT causes overstabilization of the 
5'-end mRNA, the fitness contribution of mRNA folding stability dominates over 
that of codon optimality. The 5'-end overstabilization can also lead to mRNA 
accumulation outside of the polysome, thus preventing the decay of the foreign 
transcripts despite the codon composition-driven reduction in translation 
efficiency. Importantly, the fitness effects of mRNA stability or codon 
optimality become apparent only at sub-lethal levels of trimethoprim 
individually tailored for each library, emphasizing the central role of the 
host's environment in shaping the codon bias compatibility of horizontally 
transferred genes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad123
PMCID: PMC10246835
PMID: 37221009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad118. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad118.

An Ancestral Balanced Inversion Polymorphism Confers Global Adaptation.

Kapun M(1)(2)(3)(4), Mitchell ED(1)(2)(5), Kawecki TJ(1), Schmidt P(6), Flatt 
T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(3)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Natural History Museum Vienna, Zentrale Forschungslaboratorien, Vienna, 
Austria.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Since the pioneering work of Dobzhansky in the 1930s and 1940s, many chromosomal 
inversions have been identified, but how they contribute to adaptation remains 
poorly understood. In Drosophila melanogaster, the widespread inversion 
polymorphism In(3R)Payne underpins latitudinal clines in fitness traits on 
multiple continents. Here, we use single-individual whole-genome sequencing, 
transcriptomics, and published sequencing data to study the population genomics 
of this inversion on four continents: in its ancestral African range and in 
derived populations in Europe, North America, and Australia. Our results confirm 
that this inversion originated in sub-Saharan Africa and subsequently became 
cosmopolitan; we observe marked monophyletic divergence of inverted and 
noninverted karyotypes, with some substructure among inverted chromosomes 
between continents. Despite divergent evolution of this inversion since its 
out-of-Africa migration, derived non-African populations exhibit similar 
patterns of long-range linkage disequilibrium between the inversion breakpoints 
and major peaks of divergence in its center, consistent with balancing selection 
and suggesting that the inversion harbors alleles that are maintained by 
selection on several continents. Using RNA-sequencing, we identify overlap 
between inversion-linked single-nucleotide polymorphisms and loci that are 
differentially expressed between inverted and noninverted chromosomes. 
Expression levels are higher for inverted chromosomes at low temperature, 
suggesting loss of buffering or compensatory plasticity and consistent with 
higher inversion frequency in warm climates. Our results suggest that this 
ancestrally tropical balanced polymorphism spread around the world and became 
latitudinally assorted along similar but independent climatic gradients, always 
being frequent in subtropical/tropical areas but rare or absent in temperate 
climates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad118
PMCID: PMC10234209
PMID: 37220650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad117. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad117.

Correction to: Evolution is not Uniform Along Coding Sequences.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad117
PMCID: PMC10202594
PMID: 37217229


262. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad121. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad121.

Genomic Insights into Adaptation to Karst Limestone and Incipient Speciation in 
East Asian Platycarya spp. (Juglandaceae).

Cao Y(1)(2)(3), Almeida-Silva F(2)(3), Zhang WP(1), Ding YM(1), Bai D(1), Bai 
WN(1), Zhang BW(1), Van de Peer Y(2)(3)(4)(5), Zhang DY(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Process and Resource Ecology and 
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity Science and Ecological 
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Center for Microbial Ecology and Genomics, Department of Biochemistry, 
Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(5)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

When challenged by similar environmental conditions, phylogenetically distant 
taxa often independently evolve similar traits (convergent evolution). 
Meanwhile, adaptation to extreme habitats might lead to divergence between taxa 
that are otherwise closely related. These processes have long existed in the 
conceptual sphere, yet molecular evidence, especially for woody perennials, is 
scarce. The karst endemic Platycarya longipes and its only congeneric species, 
Platycarya strobilacea, which is widely distributed in the mountains in East 
Asia, provide an ideal model for examining the molecular basis of both 
convergent evolution and speciation. Using chromosome-level genome assemblies of 
both species, and whole-genome resequencing data from 207 individuals spanning 
their entire distribution range, we demonstrate that P. longipes and P. 
strobilacea form two species-specific clades, which diverged around 2.09 million 
years ago. We find an excess of genomic regions exhibiting extreme interspecific 
differentiation, potentially due to long-term selection in P. longipes, likely 
contributing to the incipient speciation of the genus Platycarya. Interestingly, 
our results unveil underlying karst adaptation in both copies of the calcium 
influx channel gene TPC1 in P. longipes. TPC1 has previously been identified as 
a selective target in certain karst-endemic herbs, indicating a convergent 
adaptation to high calcium stress among karst-endemic species. Our study reveals 
the genic convergence of TPC1 among karst endemics and the driving forces 
underneath the incipient speciation of the two Platycarya lineages.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad121
PMCID: PMC10257982
PMID: 37216901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad119. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad119.

A Caenorhabditis elegans Male Pheromone Feminizes Germline Gene Expression in 
Hermaphrodites and Imposes Life-History Costs.

Angeles-Albores D(1), Aprison EZ(1), Dzitoyeva S(1), Ruvinsky I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 
USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Feb 18;:

Sex pheromones not only improve the reproductive success of the recipients, but 
also impose costs, such as a reduced life span. The underlying mechanisms 
largely remain to be elucidated. Here, we show that even a brief exposure to 
physiological amounts of the dominant Caenorhabditis elegans male pheromone, 
ascr#10, alters the expression of thousands of genes in hermaphrodites. The most 
dramatic effect on the transcriptome is the upregulation of genes expressed 
during oogenesis and the downregulation of genes associated with male 
gametogenesis. This result reveals a way in which social signals help to resolve 
the inherent conflict between spermatogenesis and oogenesis in a simultaneous 
hermaphrodite, presumably to optimally align reproductive function with the 
presence of potential mating partners. We also found that exposure to ascr#10 
increased the risk of persistent intestinal infections in hermaphrodites due to 
pathological pharyngeal hypertrophy. Thus, our study reveals ways in which the 
male pheromone can not only have beneficial effects on the recipients' 
reproduction, but also cause harmful consequences that reduce life span.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad119
PMCID: PMC10244002
PMID: 37210586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad120. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad120.

Long-Term Balancing Selection and the Genetic Load Linked to the 
Self-Incompatibility Locus in Arabidopsis halleri and A. lyrata.

Le Veve A(1)(2), Burghgraeve N(1), Genete M(1), Lepers-Blassiau C(1), Takou 
M(3)(4), De Meaux J(3), Mable BK(5), Durand E(1), Vekemans X(1), Castric V(1).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 8198-Evo-Eco-Paleo, Lille, France.
(2)Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Institute of Botany, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, PA, United States of 
America.
(5)School of Biodiversity, One Health & Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

Balancing selection is a form of natural selection maintaining diversity at the 
sites it targets and at linked nucleotide sites. Due to selection favoring 
heterozygosity, it has the potential to facilitate the accumulation of a 
"sheltered" load of tightly linked recessive deleterious mutations. However, 
precisely evaluating the extent of these effects has remained challenging. 
Taking advantage of plant self-incompatibility as one of the best-understood 
examples of long-term balancing selection, we provide a highly resolved picture 
of the genomic extent of balancing selection on the sheltered genetic load. We 
used targeted genome resequencing to reveal polymorphism of the genomic region 
flanking the self-incompatibility locus in three sample sets in each of the two 
closely related plant species Arabidopsis halleri and Arabidopsis lyrata, and 
used 100 control regions from throughout the genome to factor out differences in 
demographic histories and/or sample structure. Nucleotide polymorphism increased 
strongly around the S-locus in all sample sets, but only over a limited genomic 
region, as it became indistinguishable from the genomic background beyond the 
first 25-30 kb. Genes in this chromosomal interval exhibited no excess of 
mutations at 0-fold degenerated sites relative to putatively neutral sites, 
hence revealing no detectable weakening of the efficacy of purifying selection 
even for these most tightly linked genes. Overall, our results are consistent 
with the predictions of a narrow genomic influence of linkage to the S-locus and 
clarify how natural selection in one genomic region affects the evolution of the 
adjacent genomic regions.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad120
PMCID: PMC10243990
PMID: 37210585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad102. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad102.

Caecilian Genomes Reveal the Molecular Basis of Adaptation and Convergent 
Evolution of Limblessness in Snakes and Caecilians.

Ovchinnikov V(1), Uliano-Silva M(2), Wilkinson M(3), Wood J(2), Smith M(4), 
Oliver K(4), Sims Y(2), Torrance J(2), Suh A(5)(6), McCarthy SA(2)(7), Durbin 
R(2)(7), O'Connell MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Computational and Molecular Evolutionary Biology Group, School of Life 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Science, University of Nottingham, 
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Tree of Life Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Herpetology Laboratory, The Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Scientific Operations, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Organismal Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(7)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

We present genome sequences for the caecilians Geotrypetes seraphini (3.8 Gb) 
and Microcaecilia unicolor (4.7 Gb), representatives of a limbless, mostly 
soil-dwelling amphibian clade with reduced eyes, and unique putatively 
chemosensory tentacles. More than 69% of both genomes are composed of repeats, 
with retrotransposons being the most abundant. We identify 1,150 orthogroups 
that are unique to caecilians and enriched for functions in olfaction and 
detection of chemical signals. There are 379 orthogroups with signatures of 
positive selection on caecilian lineages with roles in organ development and 
morphogenesis, sensory perception, and immunity amongst others. We discover that 
caecilian genomes are missing the zone of polarizing activity regulatorysequence 
(ZRS) enhancer of Sonic Hedgehog which is also mutated in snakes. In vivo 
deletions have shown ZRS is required for limb development in mice, thus, 
revealing a shared molecular target implicated in the independent evolution of 
limblessness in snakes and caecilians.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad102
PMCID: PMC10195157
PMID: 37194566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad116. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad116.

A Selective Bottleneck During Host Entry Drives the Evolution of New Legume 
Symbionts.

Doin de Moura GG(1), Mouffok S(1), Gaudu N(1), Cazalé AC(1), Milhes M(2), Bulach 
T(2), Valière S(2), Roche D(3), Ferdy JB(4), Masson-Boivin C(1), Capela D(1), 
Remigi P(1).

Author information:
(1)LIPME, Université de Toulouse, INRAE, CNRS, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(2)INRAE, US1426, GeT-PlaGe, Genotoul, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(3)Génomique Métabolique, Genoscope, Institut François Jacob, CEA, CNRS, Univ 
Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.
(4)Evolution et Diversité Biologique, UMR5174, CNRS-Université Paul Sabatier, 
Toulouse, France.

During the emergence of new host-microbe symbioses, microbial fitness results 
from the ability to complete the different steps of symbiotic life cycles, where 
each step imposes specific selective pressures. However, the relative 
contribution of these different selective pressures to the adaptive trajectories 
of microbial symbionts is still poorly known. Here, we characterized the 
dynamics of phenotypic adaptation to a simplified symbiotic life cycle during 
the experimental evolution of a plant pathogenic bacterium into a legume 
symbiont. We observed that fast adaptation was predominantly explained by 
improved competitiveness for host entry, which outweighed adaptation to 
within-host proliferation. Whole-population sequencing of bacteria at regular 
time intervals along this evolution experiment revealed the continuous 
accumulation of new mutations (fuelled by a transient hypermutagenesis phase 
occurring at each cycle before host entry, a phenomenon described in previous 
work) and sequential sweeps of cohorts of mutations with similar temporal 
trajectories. The identification of adaptive mutations within the fixed 
mutational cohorts showed that several adaptive mutations can co-occur in the 
same cohort. Moreover, all adaptive mutations improved competitiveness for host 
entry, while only a subset of those also improved within-host proliferation. 
Computer simulations predict that this effect emerges from the presence of a 
strong selective bottleneck at host entry occurring before within-host 
proliferation and just after the hypermutagenesis phase in the rhizosphere. 
Together, these results show how selective bottlenecks can alter the relative 
influence of selective pressures acting during bacterial adaptation to multistep 
infection processes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad116
PMCID: PMC10220510
PMID: 37186547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad115. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad115.

A New Chromosome-Assigned Mongolian Gerbil Genome Allows Characterization of 
Complete Centromeres and a Fully Heterochromatic Chromosome.

Brekke TD(1), Papadopulos AST(1), Julià E(2), Fornas O(2)(3), Fu B(4), Yang 
F(5), de la Fuente R(6), Page J(7), Baril T(8), Hayward A(8), Mulley JF(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Gwynedd, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute for Science and 
Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Flow Cytometry Unit, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Cambridge Epigenetix, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Present address: School of Life Sciences and Medicine, Shandong University of 
Technology, Zibo, China.
(6)Department of Experimental Embryology, Institute of Genetics and Animal 
Biotechnology of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Magdalenka, Poland.
(7)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Cornwall, United 
Kingdom.

Chromosome-scale genome assemblies based on ultralong-read sequencing 
technologies are able to illuminate previously intractable aspects of genome 
biology such as fine-scale centromere structure and large-scale variation in 
genome features such as heterochromatin, GC content, recombination rate, and 
gene content. We present here a new chromosome-scale genome of the Mongolian 
gerbil (Meriones unguiculatus), which includes the complete sequence of all 
centromeres. Gerbils are thus the one of the first vertebrates to have their 
centromeres completely sequenced. Gerbil centromeres are composed of four 
different repeats of length 6, 37, 127, or 1,747 bp, which occur in simple 
alternating arrays and span 1-6 Mb. Gerbil genomes have both an extensive set of 
GC-rich genes and chromosomes strikingly enriched for constitutive 
heterochromatin. We sought to determine if there was a link between these two 
phenomena and found that the two heterochromatic chromosomes of the Mongolian 
gerbil have distinct underpinnings: Chromosome 5 has a large block of intraarm 
heterochromatin as the result of a massive expansion of centromeric repeats, 
while chromosome 13 is comprised of extremely large (>150 kb) repeated 
sequences. In addition to characterizing centromeres, our results demonstrate 
the importance of including karyotypic features such as chromosome number and 
the locations of centromeres in the interpretation of genome sequence data and 
highlight novel patterns involved in the evolution of chromosomes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad115
PMCID: PMC10210625
PMID: 37183864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad113. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad113.

Phylogenetic Comparative Analysis of Single-Cell Transcriptomes Reveals 
Constrained Accumulation of Gene Expression Heterogeneity during Clonal 
Expansion.

Chen F(1)(2)(3), Li Z(1), Zhang X(1)(2)(3), Wu P(1), Yang W(1), Yang J(1), Chen 
X(1)(2)(3), Yang JR(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Advanced Medical Technology Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhongshan 
School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Genetics and Biomedical Informatics, Zhongshan School of 
Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control, Ministry of Education, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

In the same way that a phylogeny summarizes the evolutionary history of species, 
a cell lineage tree describes the process of clonal expansion, in which gene 
expression differences between cells naturally accrue as a result of stochastic 
partitioning and imperfect expression control. How is functional homeostasis, a 
key factor in the biological function of any population of cells, maintained in 
the face of such continuous accumulation of transcriptomic heterogeneity remains 
largely unresolved. To answer this question, we experimentally determined the 
single-cell transcriptomes and lineage relationships of up to 50% cells in 
single-HEK293-seeded colonies. Phylogenetic comparative analyses of the 
single-cell transcriptomes on the cell lineage tree revealed three lines of 
evidence for the constrained accumulation of transcriptome heterogeneity among 
cells, including rapid saturation of transcriptomic heterogeneity upon four cell 
divisions, reduced expression differences within subtrees closer to expression 
boundaries, and cofluctuations among genes. Our analyses showcased the 
applicability of phylogenetic comparative methods in cell lineage trees, 
demonstrated the constrained accumulation of transcriptomic heterogeneity, and 
provided novel insight into the functional homeostasis of cell populations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad113
PMCID: PMC10210624
PMID: 37183780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad114. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad114.

Conservation of the Restricted Expression of Brassicaceae Bsister-Like Genes in 
Seeds Requires a Transposable Element in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Roessner C(1), Bhide AS(1)(2), Hoffmeier A(3), Schenk J(1)(4), Groß T(1)(5), 
Gramzow L(3), Theißen G(3), Becker A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Botany, Justus-Liebig-University Gießen, Gießen, Germany.
(2)OrchidKraft, Satara, India.
(3)Matthias Schleiden Institute/Genetics, Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, 
Jena, Germany.
(4)Service-Verband KVD, Dorsten, Germany.
(5)SGS Institut Fresenius GmbH, TraitGenetics Section, Gatersleben, Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):

Changes in transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) can alter the 
spatiotemporal expression pattern and transcript abundance of genes. Loss and 
gain of TFBSs were shown to cause shifts in expression patterns in numerous 
cases. However, we know little about the evolution of extended regulatory 
sequences incorporating many TFBSs. We compare, across the crucifers 
(Brassicaceae, cabbage family), the sequences between the translated regions of 
Arabidopsis Bsister (ABS)-like MADS-box genes (including paralogous GOA-like 
genes) and the next gene upstream, as an example of family-wide evolution of 
putative upstream regulatory regions (PURRs). ABS-like genes are essential for 
integument development of ovules and endothelium formation in seeds of 
Arabidopsis thaliana. A combination of motif-based gene ontology enrichment and 
reporter gene analysis using A. thaliana as common trans-regulatory environment 
allows analysis of selected Brassicaceae Bsister gene PURRs. Comparison of TFBS 
of transcriptionally active ABS-like genes with those of transcriptionally 
largely inactive GOA-like genes shows that the number of in silico predicted 
TFBS) is similar between paralogs, emphasizing the importance of experimental 
verification for in silico characterization of TFBS activity and analysis of 
their evolution. Further, our data show highly conserved expression of 
Brassicaceae ABS-like genes almost exclusively in the chalazal region of ovules. 
The Arabidopsis-specific insertion of a transposable element (TE) into the ABS 
PURRs is required for stabilizing this spatially restricted expression, while 
other Brassicaceae achieve chalaza-specific expression without TE insertion. We 
hypothesize that the chalaza-specific expression of ABS is regulated by 
cis-regulatory elements provided by the TE.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad114
PMCID: PMC10220508
PMID: 37172323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad110. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad110.

Historical Routes for Diversification of Domesticated Chickpea Inferred from 
Landrace Genomics.

Igolkina AA(1), Noujdina NV(2), Vishnyakova M(3), Longcore T(4), von Wettberg 
E(1)(5), Nuzhdin SV(6), Samsonova MG(1).

Author information:
(1)Mathematical Biology and Bioinformatics Laboratory, Peter the Great St. 
Petersburg Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russia.
(2)Marine and Environmental Biology, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)N.I. Vavilov All-Russian Institute of Plant Genetic Resources (VIR), St. 
Petersburg, Russia.
(4)Spatial Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(5)Plant and Soil Science and Gund Institute for the Environment, University of 
Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA.
(6)Molecular and Computational Biology, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad135.

According to archaeological records, chickpea (Cicer arietinum) was first 
domesticated in the Fertile Crescent about 10,000 years BP. Its subsequent 
diversification in Middle East, South Asia, Ethiopia, and the Western 
Mediterranean, however, remains obscure and cannot be resolved using only 
archeological and historical evidence. Moreover, chickpea has two market types: 
"desi" and "kabuli," for which the geographic origin is a matter of debate. To 
decipher chickpea history, we took the genetic data from 421 chickpea landraces 
unaffected by the green revolution and tested complex historical hypotheses of 
chickpea migration and admixture on two hierarchical spatial levels: within and 
between major regions of cultivation. For chickpea migration within regions, we 
developed popdisp, a Bayesian model of population dispersal from a regional 
representative center toward the sampling sites that considers geographical 
proximities between sites. This method confirmed that chickpea spreads within 
each geographical region along optimal geographical routes rather than by simple 
diffusion and estimated representative allele frequencies for each region. For 
chickpea migration between regions, we developed another model, migadmi, that 
takes allele frequencies of populations and evaluates multiple and nested 
admixture events. Applying this model to desi populations, we found both Indian 
and Middle Eastern traces in Ethiopian chickpea, suggesting the presence of a 
seaway from South Asia to Ethiopia. As for the origin of kabuli chickpeas, we 
found significant evidence for its origin from Turkey rather than Central Asia.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad110
PMCID: PMC10285117
PMID: 37159511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad106. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad106.

CAGEE: Computational Analysis of Gene Expression Evolution.

Bertram J(1)(2), Fulton B(1)(3), Tourigny JP(1)(4), Peña-Garcia Y(1), Moyle 
LC(1), Hahn MW(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(3)University Information Technology Services, Indiana University, Bloomington, 
IN.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.

Despite the increasing abundance of whole transcriptome data, few methods are 
available to analyze global gene expression across phylogenies. Here, we present 
a new software package (Computational Analysis of Gene Expression Evolution 
[CAGEE]) for inferring patterns of increases and decreases in gene expression 
across a phylogenetic tree, as well as the rate at which these changes occur. In 
contrast to previous methods that treat each gene independently, CAGEE can 
calculate genome-wide rates of gene expression, along with ancestral states for 
each gene. The statistical approach developed here makes it possible to infer 
lineage-specific shifts in rates of evolution across the genome, in addition to 
possible differences in rates among multiple tissues sampled from the same 
species. We demonstrate the accuracy and robustness of our method on simulated 
data and apply it to a data set of ovule gene expression collected from multiple 
self-compatible and self-incompatible species in the genus Solanum to test 
hypotheses about the evolutionary forces acting during mating system shifts. 
These comparisons allow us to highlight the power of CAGEE, demonstrating its 
utility for use in any empirical system and for the analysis of most 
morphological traits. Our software is available at 
https://github.com/hahnlab/CAGEE/.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad106
PMCID: PMC10195155
PMID: 37158385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad112. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad112.

Population Genomics Provide Insights into the Evolution and Adaptation of the 
Asia Corn Borer.

Peng Y(1)(2), Jin M(2), Li Z(1)(2), Li H(2), Zhang L(2), Yu S(2), Zhang Z(2), 
Fan R(1)(3), Liu J(1)(3), Xu Q(2), Wilson K(4)(2), Xiao Y(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, 
Wuhan, China.
(2)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Key 
Laboratory of Gene Editing Technologies (Hainan), Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Affairs, Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Plant Protection Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural 
Science/Key Laboratory of Green Prevention and Control on Fruits and Vegetables 
in South China Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Guangxi Key Laboratory 
of Biology for Crop Diseases and Insect Pests, Nanning, China.
(4)Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United 
Kingdom.

Understanding the genetic basis of pest adaptive evolution and the risk of 
adaptation in response to climate change is essential for the development of 
sustainable agricultural practices. However, the genetic basis of climatic 
adaptation for the Asian corn borer (ACB), Ostrinia furnacalis, the main pest of 
corn in Asia and Oceania, is poorly understood. Here, we revealed the genomic 
loci underlying the climatic adaptation and evolution in ACB by integrating 
population genomic and environmental factors. We assembled a 471-Mb 
chromosome-scale reference genome of ACB and resequenced 423 individuals 
covering 27 representative geographic areas. We inferred that the ACB effective 
population size changes tracked with the global temperature and followed by a 
recent decline. Based on an integrated analysis of whole-genome selection scans 
and genome-wide genotype-environment association studies, we revealed the 
genetic basis of ACB adaption to diverse climates. For diapause traits, we 
identified a major effect association locus containing a circadian clock gene 
(period) by analyzing a diapause-segregating population. Moreover, our 
predictions indicated that the northern populations were more ecologically 
resilient to climate change than the southern populations. Together, our results 
revealed the genomic basis for ACB environmental adaptation and provided 
potential candidate genes for future evolutionary studies and genetic adaptation 
to climate change, intending to maintain the efficacy and sustainability of 
novel control techniques.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad112
PMCID: PMC10198731
PMID: 37155936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad111. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad111.

Codon Optimization Improves the Prediction of Xylose Metabolism from Gene 
Content in Budding Yeasts.

Nalabothu RL(1)(2), Fisher KJ(1)(3), LaBella AL(4)(5)(6), Meyer TA(1)(2), 
Opulente DA(1)(2)(7), Wolters JF(1)(2), Rokas A(4)(5), Hittinger CT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, J. F. Crow Institute for the Study of Evolution, 
Wisconsin Energy Institute, Center for Genomic Science Innovation, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI.
(2)DOE Great Lakes Bioenergy Research Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, State University of New York at Oswego, 
Oswego, NY.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
(5)Evolutionary Studies Initiative, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, University of North Carolina at 
Charlotte, Charlotte, NC.
(7)Department of Biology, Villanova University, Villanova, PA.

Xylose is the second most abundant monomeric sugar in plant biomass. 
Consequently, xylose catabolism is an ecologically important trait for 
saprotrophic organisms, as well as a fundamentally important trait for 
industries that hope to convert plant mass to renewable fuels and other 
bioproducts using microbial metabolism. Although common across fungi, xylose 
catabolism is rare within Saccharomycotina, the subphylum that contains most 
industrially relevant fermentative yeast species. The genomes of several yeasts 
unable to consume xylose have been previously reported to contain the full set 
of genes in the XYL pathway, suggesting the absence of a gene-trait correlation 
for xylose metabolism. Here, we measured growth on xylose and systematically 
identified XYL pathway orthologs across the genomes of 332 budding yeast 
species. Although the XYL pathway coevolved with xylose metabolism, we found 
that pathway presence only predicted xylose catabolism about half of the time, 
demonstrating that a complete XYL pathway is necessary, but not sufficient, for 
xylose catabolism. We also found that XYL1 copy number was positively 
correlated, after phylogenetic correction, with xylose utilization. We then 
quantified codon usage bias of XYL genes and found that XYL3 codon optimization 
was significantly higher, after phylogenetic correction, in species able to 
consume xylose. Finally, we showed that codon optimization of XYL2 was 
positively correlated, after phylogenetic correction, with growth rates in 
xylose medium. We conclude that gene content alone is a weak predictor of xylose 
metabolism and that using codon optimization enhances the prediction of xylose 
metabolism from yeast genome sequence data.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad111
PMCID: PMC10263009
PMID: 37154525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad107. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad107.

Dynamics of Gene Loss following Ancient Whole-Genome Duplication in the Cryptic 
Paramecium Complex.

Gout JF(1)(2)(3), Hao Y(2)(4), Johri P(1)(2)(5), Arnaiz O(6), Doak TG(1)(7), 
Bhullar S(8), Couloux A(9), Guérin F(10), Malinsky S(8), Potekhin A(11)(12), 
Sawka N(13), Sperling L(6), Labadie K(14), Meyer E(8), Duharcourt S(10), Lynch 
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
(2)Biodesign Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, AZ.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Starkville, 
MS.
(4)Cancer and Cell Biology Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, 
Phoenix, AZ.
(5)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(6)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), Commissariat à 
l'Energie Atomique (CEA), CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(7)National Center for Genome Analysis Support, Indiana University, Bloomington, 
IN.
(8)Institut de biologie de l'ENS, Département de Biologie, Ecole Normale 
Supérieure, CNRS, Inserm, Université PSL, Paris, France.
(9)Génomique Métabolique, Genoscope, Institut François Jacob, Commissariat à 
l'Energie Atomique (CEA), CNRS, Univ Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, 
France.
(10)Université Paris Cité, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.
(11)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, Saint Petersburg State 
University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(12)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Protistology, Zoological Institute RAS, 
Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(13)Institute of Systematics and Evolution of Animals, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Krakow, Poland.
(14)Genoscope, Institut François Jacob, Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique (CEA), 
Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.

Whole-genome duplications (WGDs) have shaped the gene repertoire of many 
eukaryotic lineages. The redundancy created by WGDs typically results in a phase 
of massive gene loss. However, some WGD-derived paralogs are maintained over 
long evolutionary periods, and the relative contributions of different selective 
pressures to their maintenance are still debated. Previous studies have revealed 
a history of three successive WGDs in the lineage of the ciliate Paramecium 
tetraurelia and two of its sister species from the Paramecium aurelia complex. 
Here, we report the genome sequence and analysis of 10 additional P. aurelia 
species and 1 additional out group, revealing aspects of post-WGD evolution in 
13 species sharing a common ancestral WGD. Contrary to the morphological 
radiation of vertebrates that putatively followed two WGD events, members of the 
cryptic P. aurelia complex have remained morphologically indistinguishable after 
hundreds of millions of years. Biases in gene retention compatible with dosage 
constraints appear to play a major role opposing post-WGD gene loss across all 
13 species. In addition, post-WGD gene loss has been slower in Paramecium than 
in other species having experienced genome duplication, suggesting that the 
selective pressures against post-WGD gene loss are especially strong in 
Paramecium. A near complete lack of recent single-gene duplications in 
Paramecium provides additional evidence for strong selective pressures against 
gene dosage changes. This exceptional data set of 13 species sharing an 
ancestral WGD and 2 closely related out group species will be a useful resource 
for future studies on Paramecium as a major model organism in the evolutionary 
cell biology.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad107
PMCID: PMC10195154
PMID: 37154524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad104. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad104.

Reduction of Paraoxonase Expression Followed by Inactivation across Independent 
Semiaquatic Mammals Suggests Stepwise Path to Pseudogenization.

Graham AM(1), Jamison JM(2), Bustos M(3), Cournoyer C(4), Michaels A(5)(6), 
Presnell JS(1), Richter R(7), Crocker DE(8), Fustukjian A(9), Hunter ME(10), Rea 
LD(11), Marsillach J(12), Furlong CE(7)(13), Meyer WK(14), Clark NL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toronto-Scarborough, 
Scarborough, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Texas-San Antonio, San 
Antonio, TX.
(4)South Florida Wildlife Center, Fort Lauderdale, FL.
(5)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University, Boston, MA.
(6)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA.
(8)Department of Biology, Sonoma State University, Rohnert Park, CA.
(9)Loveland Living Planet Aquarium, Draper, UT.
(10)U.S. Geological Survey, Wetland and Aquatic Research Center, Gainesville, 
FL.
(11)Water and Environmental Research Center, Institute of Northern Engineering, 
University of Alaska-Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK.
(12)Department of Environmental & Occupational Health Sciences, University of 
Washington School of Public Health, Seattle, WA.
(13)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(14)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA.

Convergent adaptation to the same environment by multiple lineages frequently 
involves rapid evolutionary change at the same genes, implicating these genes as 
important for environmental adaptation. Such adaptive molecular changes may 
yield either change or loss of protein function; loss of function can eliminate 
newly deleterious proteins or reduce energy necessary for protein production. We 
previously found a striking case of recurrent pseudogenization of the 
Paraoxonase 1 (Pon1) gene among aquatic mammal lineages-Pon1 became a pseudogene 
with genetic lesions, such as stop codons and frameshifts, at least four times 
independently in aquatic and semiaquatic mammals. Here, we assess the landscape 
and pace of pseudogenization by studying Pon1 sequences, expression levels, and 
enzymatic activity across four aquatic and semiaquatic mammal lineages: 
pinnipeds, cetaceans, otters, and beavers. We observe in beavers and pinnipeds 
an unexpected reduction in expression of Pon3, a paralog with similar expression 
patterns but different substrate preferences. Ultimately, in all lineages with 
aquatic/semiaquatic members, we find that preceding any coding-level 
pseudogenization events in Pon1, there is a drastic decrease in expression, 
followed by relaxed selection, thus allowing accumulation of disrupting 
mutations. The recurrent loss of Pon1 function in aquatic/semiaquatic lineages 
is consistent with a benefit to Pon1 functional loss in aquatic environments. 
Accordingly, we examine diving and dietary traits across pinniped species as 
potential driving forces of Pon1 functional loss. We find that loss is best 
associated with diving activity and likely results from changes in selective 
pressures associated with hypoxia and hypoxia-induced inflammation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad104
PMCID: PMC10202596
PMID: 37146172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad094. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad094.

Predicting Environmental and Ecological Drivers of Human Population Structure.

Pless E(1), Eckburg AM(1), Henn BM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, Center for Population Biology, University of 
California, Davis, CA.
(2)UC Davis Genome Center, University of California, Davis, CA.

Landscape, climate, and culture can all structure human populations, but few 
existing methods are designed to simultaneously disentangle among a large number 
of variables in explaining genetic patterns. We developed a machine learning 
method for identifying the variables which best explain migration rates, as 
measured by the coalescent-based program MAPS that uses shared identical by 
descent tracts to infer spatial migration across a region of interest. We 
applied our method to 30 human populations in eastern Africa with high-density 
single nucleotide polymorphism array data. The remarkable diversity of 
ethnicities, languages, and environments in this region offers a unique 
opportunity to explore the variables that shape migration and genetic structure. 
We explored more than 20 spatial variables relating to landscape, climate, and 
presence of tsetse flies. The full model explained ∼40% of the variance in 
migration rate over the past 56 generations. Precipitation, minimum temperature 
of the coldest month, and elevation were the variables with the highest impact. 
Among the three groups of tsetse flies, the most impactful was fusca which 
transmits livestock trypanosomiasis. We also tested for adaptation to high 
elevation among Ethiopian populations. We did not identify well-known genes 
related to high elevation, but we did find signatures of positive selection 
related to metabolism and disease. We conclude that the environment has 
influenced the migration and adaptation of human populations in eastern Africa; 
the remaining variance in structure is likely due in part to cultural or other 
factors not captured in our model.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad094
PMCID: PMC10172848
PMID: 37146165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad103. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad103.

Genome-Wide Identification of Gene Loss Events Suggests Loss Relics as a 
Potential Source of Functional lncRNAs in Humans.

Wen ZY(1), Kang YJ(1), Ke L(1), Yang DC(1), Gao G(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life 
Sciences, Biomedical Pioneering Innovative Center (BIOPIC) & Beijing Advanced 
Innovation Center for Genomics (ICG), Center for Bioinformatics (CBI), Peking 
University, Beijing, China.

Gene loss is a prevalent source of genetic variation in genome evolution. 
Calling loss events effectively and efficiently is a critical step for 
systematically characterizing their functional and phylogenetic profiles genome 
wide. Here, we developed a novel pipeline integrating orthologous inference and 
genome alignment. Interestingly, we identified 33 gene loss events that give 
rise to evolutionarily novel long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) that show distinct 
expression features and could be associated with various functions related to 
growth, development, immunity, and reproduction, suggesting loss relics as a 
potential source of functional lncRNAs in humans. Our data also demonstrated 
that the rates of protein gene loss are variable among different lineages with 
distinct functional biases.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad103
PMCID: PMC10195156
PMID: 37140205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad109. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad109.

Redefining Possible: Combining Phylogenomic and Supersparse Data in Frogs.

Portik DM(1)(2), Streicher JW(3), Blackburn DC(4), Moen DS(5), Hutter CR(6), 
Wiens JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ.
(2)Department of Herpetology, California Academy of Sciences, USA.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, The Natural History Museum, London, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Natural History, Florida Museum of Natural History, University 
of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(5)Department of Integrative Biology, 501 Life Sciences West, Oklahoma State 
University, Stillwater, OK.
(6)Museum of Natural Science and Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana 
State University, Baton Rouge, LA.

The data available for reconstructing molecular phylogenies have become wildly 
disparate. Phylogenomic studies can generate data for thousands of genetic 
markers for dozens of species, but for hundreds of other taxa, data may be 
available from only a few genes. Can these two types of data be integrated to 
combine the advantages of both, addressing the relationships of hundreds of 
species with thousands of genes? Here, we show that this is possible, using data 
from frogs. We generated a phylogenomic data set for 138 ingroup species and 
3,784 nuclear markers (ultraconserved elements [UCEs]), including new UCE data 
from 70 species. We also assembled a supermatrix data set, including data from 
97% of frog genera (441 total), with 1-307 genes per taxon. We then produced a 
combined phylogenomic-supermatrix data set (a "gigamatrix") containing 441 
ingroup taxa and 4,091 markers but with 86% missing data overall. Likelihood 
analysis of the gigamatrix yielded a generally well-supported tree among 
families, largely consistent with trees from the phylogenomic data alone. All 
terminal taxa were placed in the expected families, even though 42.5% of these 
taxa each had >99.5% missing data and 70.2% had >90% missing data. Our results 
show that missing data need not be an impediment to successfully combining very 
large phylogenomic and supermatrix data sets, and they open the door to new 
studies that simultaneously maximize sampling of genes and taxa.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad109
PMCID: PMC10202597
PMID: 37140129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad108. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad108.

Phenotypic and Genotypic Adaptation of Escherichia coli to Thermal Stress is 
Contingent on Genetic Background.

Batarseh TN(1), Batarseh SN(1), Rodríguez-Verdugo A(1), Gaut BS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, UC Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.

Evolution can be contingent on history, but we do not yet have a clear 
understanding of the processes and dynamics that govern contingency. Here, we 
performed the second phase of a two-phase evolution experiment to investigate 
features of contingency. The first phase of the experiment was based on 
Escherichia coli clones that had evolved at the stressful temperature of 42.2 
°C. The Phase 1 lines generally evolved through two adaptive pathways: mutations 
of rpoB, which encodes the beta subunit of RNA polymerase, or through rho, a 
transcriptional terminator. We hypothesized that epistatic interactions within 
the two pathways constrained their future adaptative potential, thus affecting 
patterns of historical contingency. Using ten different E. coli Founders 
representing both adaptive pathways, we performed a second phase of evolution at 
19.0 °C to investigate how prior genetic divergence or adaptive pathway (rpoB 
vs. rho) affects evolutionary outcomes. We found that phenotype, as measured by 
relative fitness, was contingent on founder genotypes and pathways. This finding 
extended to genotypes, because E. coli from different Phase 1 histories evolved 
by adaptive mutations in distinct sets of genes. Our results suggest that 
evolution depends critically on genetic history, likely due to idiosyncratic 
epistatic interactions within and between evolutionary modules.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad108
PMCID: PMC10195153
PMID: 37140066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jun 1;40(6):msad105. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad105.

Low Spontaneous Mutation Rate in Complex Multicellular Eukaryotes with a 
Haploid-Diploid Life Cycle.

Krasovec M(1), Hoshino M(2), Zheng M(2), Lipinska AP(2), Coelho SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, UMR 7232 Biologie Intégrative des Organismes 
Marins (BIOM), Observatoire Océanologique, Banyuls-sur-Mer, France.
(2)Department of Algal Development and Evolution, Max Planck Institute for 
Biology Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

The spontaneous mutation rate µ is a crucial parameter to understand evolution 
and biodiversity. Mutation rates are highly variable across species, suggesting 
that µ is susceptible to selection and drift and that species life cycle and 
life history may impact its evolution. In particular, asexual reproduction and 
haploid selection are expected to affect the mutation rate, but very little 
empirical data are available to test this expectation. Here, we sequence 30 
genomes of a parent-offspring pedigree in the model brown alga Ectocarpus sp.7, 
and 137 genomes of an interspecific cross of the closely related brown alga 
Scytosiphon to have access to the spontaneous mutation rate of representative 
organisms of a complex multicellular eukaryotic lineage outside animals and 
plants, and to evaluate the potential impact of life cycle on the mutation rate. 
Brown algae alternate between a haploid and a diploid stage, both multicellular 
and free living, and utilize both sexual and asexual reproduction. They are, 
therefore, excellent models to empirically test expectations of the effect of 
asexual reproduction and haploid selection on mutation rate evolution. We 
estimate that Ectocarpus has a base substitution rate of µbs = 4.07 × 10-10 per 
site per generation, whereas the Scytosiphon interspecific cross had µbs = 1.22 
× 10-9. Overall, our estimations suggest that these brown algae, despite being 
multicellular complex eukaryotes, have unusually low mutation rates. In 
Ectocarpus, effective population size (Ne) could not entirely explain the low 
µbs. We propose that the haploid-diploid life cycle, combined with extensive 
asexual reproduction, may be additional key drivers of the mutation rate in 
these organisms.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad105
PMCID: PMC10254074
PMID: 37140022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad098. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad098.

Evolutionary Trajectories of New Duplicated and Putative De Novo Genes.

Montañés JC(1), Huertas M(1), Messeguer X(2), Albà MM(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Evolutionary Genomics Group, Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics, 
Hospital del Mar Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Computer Sciences Department, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Spain.

The formation of new genes during evolution is an important motor of functional 
innovation, but the rate at which new genes originate and the likelihood that 
they persist over longer evolutionary periods are still poorly understood 
questions. Two important mechanisms by which new genes arise are gene 
duplication and de novo formation from a previously noncoding sequence. Does the 
mechanism of formation influence the evolutionary trajectories of the genes? 
Proteins arisen by gene duplication retain the sequence and structural 
properties of the parental protein, and thus they may be relatively stable. 
Instead, de novo originated proteins are often species specific and thought to 
be more evolutionary labile. Despite these differences, here we show that both 
types of genes share a number of similarities, including low sequence 
constraints in their initial evolutionary phases, high turnover rates at the 
species level, and comparable persistence rates in deeper branchers, in both 
yeast and flies. In addition, we show that putative de novo proteins have an 
excess of substitutions between charged amino acids compared with the neutral 
expectation, which is reflected in the rapid loss of their initial highly basic 
character. The study supports high evolutionary dynamics of different kinds of 
new genes at the species level, in sharp contrast with the stability observed at 
later stages.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad098
PMCID: PMC10182736
PMID: 37139943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad101. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad101.

Genomic Evidence for the Nonpathogenic State in HIV-1-Infected Northern 
Pig-Tailed Macaques.

Pang W(1), Shao Y(2), Zhuang XL(2), Lu Y(1)(3), He WQ(1), Zheng HY(1), Xin 
R(1)(3), Zhang MX(1), Zhang XL(1), Song JH(1), Tian RR(1), Shen F(1), Li YH(1), 
Zhao ZJ(1), Wu DD(2)(4)(5)(6), Zheng YT(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular 
Research in Common Diseases, Center for Biosafety Mega-Science, Kunming 
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(3)Kunming College of Life Science, University of the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(4)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(5)National Resource Center for Non-Human Primates, Kunming Primate Research 
Center, and National Research Facility for Phenotypic & Genetic Analysis of 
Model Animals (Primate Facility), Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(6)Kunming Natural History Museum of Zoology, Kunming Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

HIV-1 is a highly host-specific retrovirus that infects humans but not most 
nonhuman primates. Thus, the lack of a suitable primate model that can be 
directly infected with HIV-1 hinders HIV-1/AIDS research. In the previous study, 
we have found that the northern pig-tailed macaques (NPMs) are susceptible to 
HIV-1 infection but show a nonpathogenic state. In this study, to understand 
this macaque-HIV-1 interaction, we assembled a de novo genome and longitudinal 
transcriptome for this species during the course of HIV-1 infection. Using 
comparative genomic analysis, a positively selected gene, Toll-like receptor 8, 
was identified with a weak ability to induce an inflammatory response in this 
macaque. In addition, an interferon-stimulated gene, interferon alpha inducible 
protein 27, was upregulated in acute HIV-1 infection and acquired an enhanced 
ability to inhibit HIV-1 replication compared with its human ortholog. These 
findings coincide with the observation of persistently downregulated immune 
activation and low viral replication and can partially explain the AIDS-free 
state in this macaque following HIV-1 infection. This study identified a number 
of unexplored host genes that may hamper HIV-1 replication and pathogenicity in 
NPMs and provided new insights into the host defense mechanisms in cross-species 
infection of HIV-1. This work will facilitate the adoption of NPM as a feasible 
animal model for HIV-1/AIDS research.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad101
PMCID: PMC10182734
PMID: 37134013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad100. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad100.

Developing an Evolutionary Baseline Model for Humans: Jointly Inferring 
Purifying Selection with Population History.

Johri P(1), Pfeifer SP(1), Jensen JD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Apr 11;:

Building evolutionarily appropriate baseline models for natural populations is 
not only important for answering fundamental questions in population 
genetics-including quantifying the relative contributions of adaptive versus 
nonadaptive processes-but also essential for identifying candidate loci 
experiencing relatively rare and episodic forms of selection (e.g., positive or 
balancing selection). Here, a baseline model was developed for a human 
population of West African ancestry, the Yoruba, comprising processes constantly 
operating on the genome (i.e., purifying and background selection, population 
size changes, recombination rate heterogeneity, and gene conversion). 
Specifically, to perform joint inference of selective effects with demography, 
an approximate Bayesian approach was employed that utilizes the decay of 
background selection effects around functional elements, taking into account 
genomic architecture. This approach inferred a recent 6-fold population growth 
together with a distribution of fitness effects that is skewed towards 
effectively neutral mutations. Importantly, these results further suggest that, 
although strong and/or frequent recurrent positive selection is inconsistent 
with observed data, weak to moderate positive selection is consistent but 
unidentifiable if rare.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad100
PMCID: PMC10195113
PMID: 37128989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad078. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad078.

Sex-Biased Expression Is Associated With Chromatin State in Drosophila 
melanogaster and Drosophila simulans.

Nanni AV(1)(2), Martinez N(1), Graze R(3), Morse A(1)(2), Newman JRB(2), Jain 
V(1), Vlaho S(4), Signor S(5), Nuzhdin SV(4), Renne R(1)(2), McIntyre LM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL.
(2)University of Florida Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jan 13;:

In Drosophila melanogaster and D. simulans head tissue, 60% of orthologous genes 
show evidence of sex-biased expression in at least one species. Of these, ∼39% 
(2,192) are conserved in direction. We hypothesize enrichment of open chromatin 
in the sex where we see expression bias and closed chromatin in the opposite 
sex. Male-biased orthologs are significantly enriched for H3K4me3 marks in males 
of both species (∼89% of male-biased orthologs vs. ∼76% of unbiased orthologs). 
Similarly, female-biased orthologs are significantly enriched for H3K4me3 marks 
in females of both species (∼90% of female-biased orthologs vs. ∼73% of unbiased 
orthologs). The sex-bias ratio in female-biased orthologs was similar in 
magnitude between the two species, regardless of the closed chromatin 
(H3K27me2me3) marks in males. However, in male-biased orthologs, the presence of 
H3K27me2me3 in both species significantly reduced the correlation between D. 
melanogaster sex-bias ratio and the D. simulans sex-bias ratio. Male-biased 
orthologs are enriched for evidence of positive selection in the D. melanogaster 
group. There are more male-biased genes than female-biased genes in both 
species. For orthologs with gains/losses of sex-bias between the two species, 
there is an excess of male-bias compared to female-bias, but there is no 
consistent pattern in the relationship between H3K4me3 or H3K27me2me3 chromatin 
marks and expression. These data suggest chromatin state is a component of the 
maintenance of sex-biased expression and divergence of sex-bias between species 
is reflected in the complexity of the chromatin status.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad078
PMCID: PMC10162771
PMID: 37116218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad097. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad097.

Induced Immune Reaction in the Acorn Worm, Saccoglossus kowalevskii, Informs the 
Evolution of Antiviral Immunity.

Tassia MG(1)(2), Hallowell HA(1)(3), Waits DS(1)(4), Range RC(1), Lowe CJ(5), 
Graze RM(1), Schwartz EH(1), Halanych KM(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL.
(2)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
(3)W. Harry Feinstone Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD.
(4)Center for Marine Science, University of North Carolina Wilmington, 
Wlimington, NC.
(5)Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University, Pacific Grove, CA.

Evolutionary perspectives on the deployment of immune factors following 
infection have been shaped by studies on a limited number of biomedical model 
systems with a heavy emphasis on vertebrate species. Although their 
contributions to contemporary immunology cannot be understated, a broader 
phylogenetic perspective is needed to understand the evolution of immune systems 
across Metazoa. In our study, we leverage differential gene expression analyses 
to identify genes implicated in the antiviral immune response of the acorn worm 
hemichordate, Saccoglossus kowalevskii, and place them in the context of 
immunity evolution within deuterostomes-the animal clade composed of chordates, 
hemichordates, and echinoderms. Following acute exposure to the synthetic viral 
double-stranded RNA analog, poly(I:C), we show that S. kowalevskii responds by 
regulating the transcription of genes associated with canonical innate immunity 
signaling pathways (e.g., nuclear factor κB and interferon regulatory factor 
signaling) and metabolic processes (e.g., lipid metabolism), as well as many 
genes without clear evidence of orthology with those of model species. 
Aggregated across all experimental time point contrasts, we identify 423 genes 
that are differentially expressed in response to poly(I:C). We also identify 147 
genes with altered temporal patterns of expression in response to immune 
challenge. By characterizing the molecular toolkit involved in hemichordate 
antiviral immunity, our findings provide vital evolutionary context for 
understanding the origins of immune systems within Deuterostomia.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad097
PMCID: PMC10210618
PMID: 37116212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad096. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad096.

Micro Germline-Restricted Chromosome in Blue Tits: Evidence for Meiotic 
Functions.

Mueller JC(1), Schlebusch SA(2), Pei Y(1), Poignet M(2), Vontzou N(3), 
Ruiz-Ruano FJ(3)(4), Albrecht T(2)(5), Reifová R(2), Forstmeier W(1), Suh 
A(3)(4), Kempenaers B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioural Ecology and Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck 
Institute for Biological Intelligence, Seewiesen, Germany.
(2)Department of Zoology, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Organismal Biology, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Science for 
Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Institute of Vertebrate Biology, Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic.

The germline-restricted chromosome (GRC) is likely present in all songbird 
species but differs widely in size and gene content. This extra chromosome has 
been described as either a microchromosome with only limited basic gene content 
or a macrochromosome with enriched gene functions related to female gonad and 
embryo development. Here, we assembled, annotated, and characterized the first 
micro-GRC in the blue tit (Cyanistes caeruleus) using high-fidelity long-read 
sequencing data. Although some genes on the blue tit GRC show signals of 
pseudogenization, others potentially have important functions, either currently 
or in the past. We highlight the GRC gene paralog BMP15, which is among the 
highest expressed GRC genes both in blue tits and in zebra finches (Taeniopygia 
guttata) and is known to play a role in oocyte and follicular maturation in 
other vertebrates. The GRC genes of the blue tit are further enriched for 
functions related to the synaptonemal complex. We found a similar functional 
enrichment when analyzing published data on GRC genes from two nightingale 
species (Luscinia spp.). We hypothesize that these genes play a role in 
maintaining standard maternal inheritance or in recombining maternal and 
paternal GRCs during potential episodes of biparental inheritance.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad096
PMCID: PMC10172847
PMID: 37116210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad099. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad099.

Principles of Cold Adaptation of Fish Lactate Dehydrogenases Revealed by 
Computer Simulations of the Catalytic Reaction.

Koenekoop L(1), Åqvist J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell & Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Biomedical 
Center, Uppsala, Sweden.

Cold-adapted enzymes from psychrophilic and psychrotolerant species are 
characterized by a higher catalytic activity at low temperature than their 
mesophilic orthologs and are also usually found to be more thermolabile. 
Computer simulations of the catalytic reactions have been shown to be a very 
powerful tool for analyzing the structural and energetic origins of these 
effects. Here, we examine the cold adaptation of lactate dehydrogenases from two 
Antarctic and sub-Antarctic fish species using this approach and compare our 
results with those obtained for the orthologous dogfish enzyme. Direct 
calculations of thermodynamic activation parameters show that the cold-adapted 
fish enzymes are characterized by a lower activation enthalpy and a more 
negative entropy term. This appears to be a universal feature of psychrophilic 
enzymes, and it is found to originate from a higher flexibility of certain parts 
of the protein surface. We also carry out free energy simulations that address 
the differences in thermal stability and substrate binding affinity between the 
two cold-adapted enzymes, which only differ by a single mutation. These 
calculations capture the effects previously seen in in vitro studies and provide 
straightforward explanations of these experimental results.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad099
PMCID: PMC10184443
PMID: 37116207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad091. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad091.

Two Forms of Sexual Dimorphism in Gene Expression in Drosophila melanogaster: 
Their Coincidence and Evolutionary Genetics.

Singh A(1), Agrawal AF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.

Phenotypic sexual dimorphism can be mediated by sex differences in gene 
expression. We examine two forms of sexual dimorphism in gene expression in 
Drosophila melanogaster: 1) sex-biased gene expression (SBGE) in which the sexes 
differ in the amount a gene is expressed and 2) sexual dimorphism in isoform 
usage, that is, sex-specific splicing (SSS). In whole body (but not the head) 
expression, we find a negative association between SBGE and SSS, possibly 
suggesting that these are alternate routes to resolving sexual antagonistic 
selection. Next, we evaluate whether expression dimorphism contributes to the 
heterogeneity among genes in rmf, the intersexual genetic correlation in body 
expression that constrains the extent to which a gene's expression can evolve 
independently between the sexes. We find lower rmf values for genes with than 
without SSS. We find higher rmf values for male- than female-biased genes 
(except genes with extreme male bias), even though male-biased genes are known 
to have greater evolutionary divergence in expression. Finally, we examine 
population genetic patterns in relation to SBGE and SSS because genes with 
expression dimorphism have likely experienced a history of sex differences in 
selection. SSS is associated with reduced values of Tajima's D and elevated 
direction of selection (DoS) values, suggestive of higher rates of adaptive 
evolution. Though DoS is highly elevated for genes with extreme male bias, DoS 
otherwise tends to decline from female-biased to unbiased to male-biased genes. 
Collectively, the results indicate that SBGE and SSS are differentially 
distributed across the genome and are associated with different forms of 
selection.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad091
PMCID: PMC10162685
PMID: 37116199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad077. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad077.

Correction to: Micro-RNA Clusters Integrate Evolutionary Constraints on 
Expression and Target Affinities: The miR-6/5/4/286/3/309 Cluster in Drosophila.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2955-2965.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad077
PMCID: PMC10132472
PMID: 37099649


290. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad041. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad041.

Beginner's Guide on the Use of PAML to Detect Positive Selection.

Álvarez-Carretero S(1), Kapli P(1), Yang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

The CODEML program in the PAML package has been widely used to analyze 
protein-coding gene sequences to estimate the synonymous and nonsynonymous rates 
(dS and dN) and to detect positive Darwinian selection driving protein 
evolution. For users not familiar with molecular evolutionary analysis, the 
program is known to have a steep learning curve. Here, we provide a step-by-step 
protocol to illustrate the commonly used tests available in the program, 
including the branch models, the site models, and the branch-site models, which 
can be used to detect positive selection driving adaptive protein evolution 
affecting particular lineages of the species phylogeny, affecting a subset of 
amino acid residues in the protein, and affecting a subset of sites along 
prespecified lineages, respectively. A data set of the myxovirus (Mx) genes from 
ten mammal and two bird species is used as an example. We discuss a new feature 
in CODEML that allows users to perform positive selection tests for multiple 
genes for the same set of taxa, as is common in modern genome-sequencing 
projects. The PAML package is distributed at https://github.com/abacus-gene/paml 
under the GNU license, with support provided at its discussion site 
(https://groups.google.com/g/pamlsoftware). Data files used in this protocol are 
available at https://github.com/abacus-gene/paml-tutorial.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad041
PMCID: PMC10127084
PMID: 37096789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad095. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad095.

SAG-RAD: A Method for Single-Cell Population Genomics of Unicellular Eukaryotes.

Gollnisch R(1)(2), Wallenius J(3), Gribble KE(4), Ahrén D(5), Rengefors K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Aquatic Ecology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Earth Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, 
Sweden.
(4)Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA.
(5)National Bioinformatics Infrastructure Sweden (NBIS), SciLifeLab, Department 
of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Sequencing of reduced representation libraries enables genotyping of many 
individuals for population genomic studies. However, high amounts of DNA are 
required, and the method cannot be applied directly on single cells, preventing 
its use on most microbes. We developed and implemented the analysis of single 
amplified genomes followed by restriction-site-associated DNA sequencing to 
bypass labor-intensive culturing and to avoid culturing bias in population 
genomic studies of unicellular eukaryotes. This method thus opens the way for 
addressing important questions about the genetic diversity, gene flow, 
adaptation, dispersal, and biogeography of hitherto unexplored species.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad095
PMCID: PMC10202595
PMID: 37079883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad092. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad092.

Chiropterans Are a Hotspot for Horizontal Transfer of DNA Transposons in 
Mammalia.

Paulat NS(1), Storer JM(2), Moreno-Santillán DD(1), Osmanski AB(1), Sullivan 
KAM(1), Grimshaw JR(1), Korstian J(1), Halsey M(1), Garcia CJ(1), Crookshanks 
C(1), Roberts J(1), Smit AFA(2), Hubley R(2), Rosen J(2), Teeling EC(3), Vernes 
SC(4)(5)(6), Myers E(7), Pippel M(7), Brown T(7), Hiller M(8); Zoonomia 
Consortium; Rojas D(9), Dávalos LM(10)(11), Lindblad-Toh K(12)(13), Karlsson 
EK(13)(14)(15), Ray DA(1).

Collaborators: Andrews G, Armstrong JC, Bianchi M, Birren BW, Bredemeyer KR, 
Breit AM, Christmas MJ, Clawson H, Damas J, Di Palma F, Diekhans M, Dong MX, 
Eizirik E, Fan K, Fanter C, Foley NM, Forsberg-Nilsson K, Garcia CJ, Gatesy J, 
Gazal S, Genereux DP, Goodman L, Grimshaw J, Halsey MK, Harris AJ, Hickey G, 
Hiller M, Hindle AG, Hubley RM, Hughes GM, Johnson J, Juan D, Kaplow IM, 
Karlsson EK, Keough KC, Kirilenko B, Koepfli KP, Korstian JM, Kowalczyk A, 
Kozyrev SV, Lawler AJ, Lawless C, Lehmann T, Levesque DL, Lewin HA, Li X, Lind 
A, Lindblad-Toh K, Mackay-Smith A, Marinescu VD, Marques-Bonet T, Mason VC, 
Meadows JRS, Meyer WK, Moore JE, Moreira LR, Moreno-Santillan DD, Morrill KM, 
Muntané G, Murphy WJ, Navarro A, Nweeia M, Ortmann S, Osmanski A, Paten B, 
Paulat NS, Pfenning AR, Phan BN, Pollard KS, Pratt HE, Ray DA, Reilly SK, Rosen 
JR, Ruf I, Ryan L, Ryder OA, Sabeti PC, Schäffer DE, Serres A, Shapiro B, Smit 
AFA, Springer M, Srinivasan C, Steiner C, Storer JM, Sullivan KAM, Sullivan PF, 
Sundström E, Supple MA, Swofford R, Talbot JE, Teeling E, Turner-Maier J, 
Valenzuela A, Wagner F, Wallerman O, Wang C, Wang J, Weng Z, Wilder AP, Wirthlin 
ME, Xue JR, Zhang X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX.
(2)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA.
(3)School of Biology and Environmental Science, University College Dublin, 
Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.
(4)Neurogenetics of Vocal Communication Group, Max Planck Institute for 
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(6)School of Biology, The University of St Andrews, Fife, United Kingdom.
(7)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, 
Germany.
(8)LOEWE Centre for Translational Biodiversity Genomics, Frankfurt, Germany.
(9)Department of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Pontificia Universidad 
Javeriana Cali, Valle del Cauca, Colombia.
(10)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, 
NY.
(11)Consortium for Inter-Disciplinary Environmental Research, Stony Brook 
University Stony Brook, NY.
(12)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(13)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA.
(14)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, UMass Chan Medical 
School, Worcester, MA.
(15)Program in Molecular Medicine, UMass Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA.

Horizontal transfer of transposable elements (TEs) is an important mechanism 
contributing to genetic diversity and innovation. Bats (order Chiroptera) have 
repeatedly been shown to experience horizontal transfer of TEs at what appears 
to be a high rate compared with other mammals. We investigated the occurrence of 
horizontally transferred (HT) DNA transposons involving bats. We found over 200 
putative HT elements within bats; 16 transposons were shared across distantly 
related mammalian clades, and 2 other elements were shared with a fish and two 
lizard species. Our results indicate that bats are a hotspot for horizontal 
transfer of DNA transposons. These events broadly coincide with the 
diversification of several bat clades, supporting the hypothesis that DNA 
transposon invasions have contributed to genetic diversification of bats.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad092
PMCID: PMC10162687
PMID: 37071810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad093. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad093.

The Genetic Architecture of Adaptation to Leaf and Root Bacterial Microbiota in 
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Roux F(1), Frachon L(1)(2), Bartoli C(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Fabrice Roux, Laboratoire des Interactions Plantes-Microbes-Environnement, 
Institut National de Recherche pour l'Agriculture, l'Alimentation et 
l'Environnement, CNRS, Université de Toulouse, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(2)Department of Systematic and Evolutionary Botany, University of Zurich, 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Institute for Genetics, Environment and Plant Protection (IGEPP), INRAE, 
Institut Agro AgroCampus Ouest, Université de Rennes 1, Le Rheu, France.

Understanding the role of the host genome in modulating microbiota variation is 
a need to shed light on the holobiont theory and overcome the current limits on 
the description of host-microbiota interactions at the genomic and molecular 
levels. However, the host genetic architecture structuring microbiota is only 
partly described in plants. In addition, most association genetic studies on 
microbiota are often carried out outside the native habitats where the host 
evolves and the identification of signatures of local adaptation on the 
candidate genes has been overlooked. To fill these gaps and dissect the genetic 
architecture driving adaptive plant-microbiota interactions, we adopted a 
genome-environment association (GEA) analysis on 141 whole-genome sequenced 
natural populations of Arabidopsis thaliana characterized in situ for their leaf 
and root bacterial communities in fall and spring, and a large range of 
nonmicrobial ecological factors (i.e., climate, soil, and plant communities). A 
much higher fraction of among-population microbiota variance was explained by 
the host genetics than by nonmicrobial ecological factors. Importantly, the 
relative importance of host genetics and nonmicrobial ecological factors in 
explaining the presence of particular operational taxonomic units (OTUs) differs 
between bacterial families and genera. In addition, the polygenic architecture 
of adaptation to bacterial communities was highly flexible between plant 
compartments and seasons. Relatedly, signatures of local adaptation were 
stronger on quantitative trait loci (QTLs) of the root microbiota in spring. 
Finally, plant immunity appears as a major source of adaptive genetic variation 
structuring bacterial assemblages in A. thaliana.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad093
PMCID: PMC10172849
PMID: 37071808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad090. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad090.

Dynamic Evolution of Retroviral Envelope Genes in Egg-Laying Mammalian Genomes.

Kitao K(1), Shoji H(1), Miyazawa T(1), Nakagawa S(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Virus-Host Coevolution, Institute for Frontier Life and Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Life Science, Tokai University School of Medicine, 
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Division of Genome Sciences, Institute of Medical Sciences, Tokai University, 
Isehara, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Division of Interdisciplinary Merging of Health Research, Micro/Nano 
Technology Center, Tokai University, Hiratsuka, Kanagawa, Japan.

Independently acquired envelope (env) genes from endogenous retroviruses have 
contributed to the placental trophoblast cell-cell fusion in therian mammals. 
Egg-laying mammals (monotremes) are an important sister clade for understanding 
mammalian placental evolution, but the env genes in their genomes have yet to be 
investigated. Here, env-derived open reading frames (env-ORFs) encoding more 
than 400 amino acid lengths were searched in the genomes of two monotremes: 
platypus and echidna. Only two env-ORFs were present in the platypus genome, 
whereas 121 env-ORFs were found in the echidna genome. The echidna env-ORFs were 
phylogenetically classified into seven groups named env-Tac1 to -Tac7. Among 
them, the env-Tac1 group contained only a single gene, and its amino acid 
sequence showed high similarity to those of the RD114/simian type D 
retroviruses. Using the pseudotyped virus assay, we demonstrated that the 
Env-Tac1 protein utilizes echidna sodium-dependent neutral amino acid 
transporter type 1 and 2 (ASCT1 and ASCT2) as entry receptors. Moreover, the 
Env-Tac1 protein caused cell-cell fusion in human 293T cells depending on the 
expression of ASCT1 and ASCT2. These results illustrate that fusogenic env genes 
are not restricted to placental mammals, providing insights into the evolution 
of retroviral genes and the placenta.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad090
PMCID: PMC10152393
PMID: 37062963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that there are no conflicts of 
interest.


295. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad089. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad089.

Adaptive Evolution of the Spike Protein in Coronaviruses.

Tang X(1), Qian Z(2), Lu X(3)(4), Lu J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, Center for 
Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen 
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution/Yunnan Key Laboratory 
of Biodiversity Information, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Coronaviruses are single-stranded, positive-sense RNA viruses that can infect 
many mammal and avian species. The Spike (S) protein of coronaviruses binds to a 
receptor on the host cell surface to promote viral entry. The interactions 
between the S proteins of coronaviruses and receptors of host cells are 
extraordinarily complex, with coronaviruses from different genera being able to 
recognize the same receptor and coronaviruses from the same genus able to bind 
distinct receptors. As the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic has developed, many 
changes in the S protein have been under positive selection by altering the 
receptor-binding affinity, reducing antibody neutralization activities, or 
affecting T-cell responses. It is intriguing to determine whether the selection 
pressure on the S gene differs between severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) and other coronaviruses due to the host shift from 
nonhuman animals to humans. Here, we show that the S gene, particularly the S1 
region, has experienced positive selection in both SARS-CoV-2 and other 
coronaviruses. Although the S1 N-terminal domain exhibits signals of positive 
selection in the pairwise comparisons in all four coronavirus genera, positive 
selection is primarily detected in the S1 C-terminal domain (the 
receptor-binding domain) in the ongoing evolution of SARS-CoV-2, possibly owing 
to the change in host settings and the widespread natural infection and 
SARS-CoV-2 vaccination in humans.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad089
PMCID: PMC10139704
PMID: 37052956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


296. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad055. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad055.

Tracing Eastern Wolf Origins From Whole-Genome Data in Context of Extensive 
Hybridization.

Vilaça ST(1)(2), Donaldson ME(1), Benazzo A(2), Wheeldon TJ(3), Vizzari MT(2), 
Bertorelle G(2), Patterson BR(3), Kyle CJ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Environmental and Life Sciences Graduate Program, Trent University, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(3)Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry, Wildlife Research and 
Monitoring Section, Trent University, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Forensic Science Department, Trent University, Ontario, Canada.

Southeastern Canada is inhabited by an amalgam of hybridizing wolf-like canids, 
raising fundamental questions regarding their taxonomy, origins, and timing of 
hybridization events. Eastern wolves (Canis lycaon), specifically, have been the 
subject of significant controversy, being viewed as either a distinct taxonomic 
entity of conservation concern or a recent hybrid of coyotes (C. latrans) and 
grey wolves (C. lupus). Mitochondrial DNA analyses show some evidence of eastern 
wolves being North American evolved canids. In contrast, nuclear genome studies 
indicate eastern wolves are best described as a hybrid entity, but with unclear 
timing of hybridization events. To test hypotheses related to these competing 
findings we sequenced whole genomes of 25 individuals, representative of extant 
Canadian wolf-like canid types of known origin and levels of contemporary 
hybridization. Here we present data describing eastern wolves as a distinct 
taxonomic entity that evolved separately from grey wolves for the past ∼67,000 
years with an admixture event with coyotes ∼37,000 years ago. We show that Great 
Lakes wolves originated as a product of admixture between grey wolves and 
eastern wolves after the last glaciation (∼8,000 years ago) while eastern 
coyotes originated as a product of admixture between "western" coyotes and 
eastern wolves during the last century. Eastern wolf nuclear genomes appear 
shaped by historical and contemporary gene flow with grey wolves and coyotes, 
yet evolutionary uniqueness remains among eastern wolves currently inhabiting a 
restricted range in southeastern Canada.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad055
PMCID: PMC10098045
PMID: 37046402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad087. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad087.

Evolution of Linoleic Acid Biosynthesis Paved the Way for Ecological Success of 
Termites.

Macháček S(1)(2), Tupec M(1)(3), Horáček N(3)(4), Halmová M(1)(3), Roy A(5), 
Machara A(6), Kyjaková P(4), Lukšan O(4), Pichová I(1), Hanus R(4).

Author information:
(1)Viral and Microbial Proteins, Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and 
Technology Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Chemistry of Social Insects, Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Forest Molecular Entomology Lab, Czech University of Life Sciences, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(6)Drug Discovery, Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.

Termites are dominant animals of tropical terrestrial ecosystems. Their success 
is due to their eusocial organization as well as their ability to digest dead 
plant tissues. While being extremely abundant, the termite diet is poor in 
crucial nutrients, such as fatty acids. Linoleic acid (LA) is a precursor for 
many vital biomolecules, and most animals depend on its dietary supply. Termites 
count among the exceptions known to produce LA de novo, presumably via the 
action of an unknown Δ12 fatty acyl desaturase (FAD) introducing the second 
double bond into monounsaturated oleic acid. Here, we search for the 
evolutionary origin of LA biosynthesis in termites. To this end, we compile the 
repertoire of FAD homologs from 57 species of termites and their closest 
relatives, the cockroaches, analyze FAD phylogeny, and identify a potential Δ12 
FAD branch, which arose through duplication of a likely Δ9 FAD. We functionally 
characterize both paralogs and identify the Δ9 activity in the ancestral FAD-A1a 
and the Δ12 activity responsible for LA biosynthesis in FAD-A1b. Through the 
combination of homology modeling and site-directed mutagenesis, we pinpoint 
structural features possibly contributing to the distinct functions, 
regiospecificities, and substrate preferences of the two enzymes. We confirm the 
presence of both paralogs in all 36 studied species of the Blattoidea lineage 
(Blattidae, Lamproblattidae, Cryptocercidae, and termites) and conclude that we 
identified an evolutionary event important for the ecological success of 
termites, which took place in their cockroach ancestors roughly 160 My and 
remained conserved throughout termite diversification into 3,000 extant species.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad087
PMCID: PMC10139705
PMID: 37043525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad088. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad088.

The Origin of Floral Quartet Formation-Ancient Exon Duplications Shaped the 
Evolution of MIKC-type MADS-domain Transcription Factor Interactions.

Rümpler F(1), Tessari C(1), Gramzow L(1), Gafert C(1), Blohs M(1), Theißen G(1).

Author information:
(1)Matthias Schleiden Institute/Genetics, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 
Jena, Germany.

During development of flowering plants, some MIKC-type MADS-domain transcription 
factors (MTFs) exert their regulatory function as heterotetrameric complexes 
bound to two sites on the DNA of target genes. This way they constitute "floral 
quartets" or related "floral quartet-like complexes" (FQCs), involving a unique 
multimeric system of paralogous protein interactions. Tetramerization of MTFs is 
brought about mainly by interactions of keratin-like (K) domains. The K-domain 
associated with the more ancient DNA-binding MADS-domain during evolution in the 
stem group of extant streptophytes (charophyte green algae + land plants). 
However, whether this was sufficient for MTF tetramerization and FQC formation 
to occur, remains unknown. Here, we provide biophysical and bioinformatic data 
indicating that FQC formation likely originated in the stem group of land plants 
in a sublineage of MIKC-type genes termed MIKCC-type genes. In the stem group of 
this gene lineage, the duplication of the most downstream exon encoding the 
K-domain led to a C-terminal elongation of the second K-domain helix, thus, 
generating the tetramerization interface found in extant MIKCC-type proteins. In 
the stem group of the sister lineage of the MIKCC-type genes, termed MIKC*-type 
genes, the duplication of two other K-domain exons occurred, extending the 
K-domain at its N-terminal end. Our data indicate that this structural change 
prevents heterodimerization between MIKCC-type and MIKC*-type proteins. This 
way, two largely independent gene regulatory networks could be established, 
featuring MIKCC-type or MIKC*-type proteins, respectively, that control 
different aspects of plant development.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad088
PMCID: PMC10152394
PMID: 37043523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest statement. The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.


299. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad086. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad086.

Variation in DNA Methylation in Avian Nestlings Is Largely Determined by Genetic 
Effects.

Sepers B(1)(2)(3), Chen RS(1)(3), Memelink M(1), Verhoeven KJF(4), van Oers 
K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Ecology, Netherlands Institute of Ecology (NIOO-KNAW), 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Behavioural Ecology Group, Wageningen University & Research (WUR), 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Animal Behaviour, University of Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany.
(4)Department of Terrestrial Ecology, Netherlands Institute of Ecology 
(NIOO-KNAW), Wageningen, The Netherlands.

As environmental fluctuations are becoming more common, organisms need to 
rapidly adapt to anthropogenic, climatic, and ecological changes. Epigenetic 
modifications and DNA methylation in particular provide organisms with a 
mechanism to shape their phenotypic responses during development. Studies 
suggest that environmentally induced DNA methylation might allow for adaptive 
phenotypic plasticity that could last throughout an organism's lifetime. Despite 
a number of studies demonstrating environmentally induced DNA methylation 
changes, we know relatively little about what proportion of the epigenome is 
affected by environmental factors, rather than being a consequence of genetic 
variation. In the current study, we use a partial cross-foster design in a 
natural great tit (Parus major) population to disentangle the effects of common 
origin from common rearing environment on DNA methylation. We found that 
variance in DNA methylation in 8,315 CpG sites was explained by a common origin 
and only in 101 by a common rearing environment. Subsequently, we mapped 
quantitative trait loci for the brood of origin CpG sites and detected 754 cis 
and 4,202 trans methylation quantitative trait loci, involving 24% of the CpG 
sites. Our results indicate that the scope for environmentally induced 
methylation marks independent of the genotype is limited and that the majority 
of variation in DNA methylation early in life is determined by genetic factors 
instead. These findings suggest that there may be little opportunity for 
selection to act on variation in DNA methylation. This implies that most DNA 
methylation variation likely does not evolve independently of genomic changes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad086
PMCID: PMC10139706
PMID: 37039566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad085. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad085.

Evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 Mutational Spectrum.

Bloom JD(1)(2)(3), Beichman AC(2), Neher RA(4)(5), Harris K(2).

Author information:
(1)Basic Sciences Division and Computational Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Center, Seattle, WA.
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA.
(4)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2022 Nov 21;:

SARS-CoV-2 evolves rapidly in part because of its high mutation rate. Here, we 
examine whether this mutational process itself has changed during viral 
evolution. To do this, we quantify the relative rates of different types of 
single-nucleotide mutations at 4-fold degenerate sites in the viral genome 
across millions of human SARS-CoV-2 sequences. We find clear shifts in the 
relative rates of several types of mutations during SARS-CoV-2 evolution. The 
most striking trend is a roughly 2-fold decrease in the relative rate of G→T 
mutations in Omicron versus early clades, as was recently noted by Ruis et al. 
(2022. Mutational spectra distinguish SARS-CoV-2 replication niches. bioRxiv, 
doi:10.1101/2022.09.27.509649). There is also a decrease in the relative rate of 
C→T mutations in Delta, and other subtle changes in the mutation spectrum along 
the phylogeny. We speculate that these changes in the mutation spectrum could 
arise from viral mutations that affect genome replication, packaging, and 
antagonization of host innate-immune factors, although environmental factors 
could also play a role. Interestingly, the mutation spectrum of Omicron is more 
similar than that of earlier SARS-CoV-2 clades to the spectrum that shaped the 
long-term evolution of sarbecoviruses. Overall, our work shows that the mutation 
process is itself a dynamic variable during SARS-CoV-2 evolution and suggests 
that human SARS-CoV-2 may be trending toward a mutation spectrum more similar to 
that of other animal sarbecoviruses.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad085
PMCID: PMC10124870
PMID: 37039557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. J.D.B. is on the 
scientific advisory boards of Apriori Bio, Aerium Therapeutics, and Oncorus. 
J.D.B. receives royalty payments as an inventor on Fred Hutch’s licensed patents 
related to viral deep mutational scanning.


301. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad084. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad084.

Low Complexity Regions in Proteins and DNA are Poorly Correlated.

Enright JM(1), Dickson ZW(1), Golding GB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Low complexity sequences (LCRs) are well known within coding as well as 
non-coding sequences. A low complexity region within a protein must be encoded 
by the underlying DNA sequence. Here, we examine the relationship between the 
entropy of the protein sequence and that of the DNA sequence which encodes it. 
We show that they are poorly correlated whether starting with a low complexity 
region within the protein and comparing it to the corresponding sequence in the 
DNA or by finding a low complexity region within coding DNA and comparing it to 
the corresponding sequence in the protein. We show this is the case within the 
proteomes of five model organisms: Homo sapiens, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 
Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Arabidopsis thaliana. We 
also report a significant bias against mononucleic codons in LCR encoding 
sequences. By comparison with simulated proteomes, we show that highly 
repetitive LCRs may be explained by neutral, slippage-based evolution, but 
compositionally biased LCRs with cryptic repeats are not. We demonstrate that 
other biological biases and forces must be acting to create and maintain these 
LCRs. Uncovering these forces will improve our understanding of protein LCR 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad084
PMCID: PMC10124876
PMID: 37036379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.


302. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad081. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad081.

Hydrophobicity-Driven Increases in Editing in Mitochondrial mRNAs during the 
Evolution of Kinetoplastids.

Rusman F(1), Floridia-Yapur N(1), Díaz AG(1), Ponce T(1), Diosque P(1), Tomasini 
N(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Epidemiología Molecular, Instituto de Patología Experimental, 
Universidad Nacional de Salta-CONICET, Salta, Argentina.

Kinetoplastids are a diverse group of flagellates which exhibit editing by 
insertion/deletion of Us in the mitochondrial mRNAs. Some mRNAs require editing 
to build most of their coding sequences, a process known as pan-editing. 
Evidence suggests that pan-editing is an ancestral feature in kinetoplastids. 
Here, we investigate how the transition from nonedited to pan-edited states 
occurred. The mitochondrial mRNAs and protein sequences from nine kinetoplastids 
and related groups (diplonemids, euglenids, and jakobids) were analyzed. RNA 
editing increased protein hydrophobicity to extreme values by introducing Us in 
the second codon position, despite the absence of editing preferences related to 
codon position. In addition, hydrophobicity was maintained by purifying 
selection in species that lost editing by retroposition of the fully edited 
mRNA. Only a few hydrophobic to hydrophilic amino acid changes were inferred for 
such species. In the protein secondary structure, these changes occurred 
spatially close to other hydrophilic residues. The analysis of coevolving sites 
showed that multiple changes are required together for hydrophobicity to be 
lost, which suggest the proteins are locked into extended hydrophobicity. 
Finally, an analysis of the NAD7 protein-protein interactions showed they can 
also influence hydrophobicity increase in the protein and where editing can 
occur in the mRNA. In conclusion, our results suggest that protein 
hydrophobicity has influenced editing site selection and how editing expanded in 
mRNAs. In effect, the hydrophobicity increase was entrenched by a neutral 
ratchet moved by a mutational pressure to introduce Us, thus helping to explain 
both RNA editing increase and, possibly, persistence.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad081
PMCID: PMC10118304
PMID: 37030003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad083. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad083.

Meiotic Recognition of Evolutionarily Diverged Homologs: Chromosomal Hybrid 
Sterility Revisited.

Forejt J(1), Jansa P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mouse Molecular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Genetics, 
Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.

Hybrid sterility (HS) is an early postzygotic reproductive isolation mechanism 
observed in all sexually reproducing species. Infertility of hybrids prevents 
gene flow between incipient species and leads to speciation. While Drosophila 
studies have focused almost exclusively on the genic control of HS, two other 
model species, Mus musculus and budding yeast, provided the first experimental 
evidence of hybrid sterility governed by the nongenic effects of DNA sequence 
divergence. Here, we propose that the nongenic effect of increasing DNA 
divergence between closely related species may impair mutual recognition of 
homologous chromosomes and disrupt their synapsis. Unsynapsed or mispaired 
homologs can induce early meiotic arrest, or their random segregation can cause 
aneuploidy of spermatids and sperm cells. Impaired recognition of homologs may 
thus act as a universal chromosomal checkpoint contributing to the complexity of 
genetic control of HS. Chromosomal HS controlled by the Prdm9 gene in mice and 
HS driven by the mismatch repair machinery in yeast are currently the most 
advanced examples of chromosomal homology search-based HS. More focus on the 
cellular and molecular phenotypes of meiosis will be needed to further validate 
the role of homolog recognition in hybrid sterility and speciation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad083
PMCID: PMC10124879
PMID: 37030001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):msad082. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad082.

Population Genomic Evidence of Adaptive Response during the Invasion History of 
Plasmodium falciparum in the Americas.

Lefebvre MJM(1), Daron J(1), Legrand E(2), Fontaine MC(1)(3), Rougeron V(4), 
Prugnolle F(4).

Author information:
(1)MiVEGEC, Univ. Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, Montpellier, France.
(2)Malaria Biology and Vaccine Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences (GELIFES), University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)REHABS, International Research Laboratory, CNRS-NMU-UCBL, George Campus, 
Nelson Mandela University, George, South Africa.

Plasmodium falciparum, the most virulent agent of human malaria, spread from 
Africa to all continents following the out-of-Africa human migrations. During 
the transatlantic slave trade between the 16th and 19th centuries, it was 
introduced twice independently to the Americas where it adapted to new 
environmental conditions (new human populations and mosquito species). Here, we 
analyzed the genome-wide polymorphisms of 2,635 isolates across the current P. 
falciparum distribution range in Africa, Asia, Oceania, and the Americas to 
investigate its genetic structure, invasion history, and selective pressures 
associated with its adaptation to the American environment. We confirmed that 
American populations originated from Africa with at least two independent 
introductions that led to two genetically distinct clusters, one in the North 
(Haiti and Colombia) and one in the South (French Guiana and Brazil), and an 
admixed Peruvian group. Genome scans revealed recent and more ancient signals of 
positive selection in the American populations. Particularly, we detected 
positive selection signals in genes involved in interactions with hosts (human 
and mosquito) cells and in genes involved in resistance to malaria drugs in both 
clusters. Analyses suggested that for five genes, adaptive introgression between 
clusters or selection on standing variation was at the origin of this repeated 
evolution. This study provides new genetic evidence on P. falciparum 
colonization history and on its local adaptation in the Americas.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad082
PMCID: PMC10162688
PMID: 37030000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad080. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad080.

The Snapdragon Genomes Reveal the Evolutionary Dynamics of the S-Locus 
Supergene.

Zhu S(1)(2)(3), Zhang Y(4), Copsy L(5), Han Q(3)(4), Zheng D(1)(2)(3), Coen 
E(5), Xue Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)National Genomics Data Center & CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and 
Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(2)China National Center for Bioinformation, Beijing, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Plant Cell and Chromosome Engineering, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology, and the Innovation Academy of Seed Design, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)John Innes Centre, Norwich, United Kingdom.

The genus Antirrhinum has been used as a model to study self-incompatibility 
extensively. The multi-allelic S-locus, carrying a pistil S-RNase and dozens of 
S-locus F-box (SLF) genes, underlies the genetic control of self-incompatibility 
(SI) in Antirrhinum hispanicum. However, there have been limited studies on the 
genomic organization of the S-locus supergene due to a lack of high-quality 
genomic data. Here, we present the chromosome-level reference and 
haplotype-resolved genome assemblies of a self-incompatible A. hispanicum line, 
AhS7S8. For the first time, 2 complete A. hispanicum S-haplotypes spanning 
∼1.2 Mb and containing a total of 32 SLFs were reconstructed, whereas most of 
the SLFs derived from retroelement-mediated proximal or tandem duplication 
∼122 Mya. Back then, the S-RNase gene and incipient SLFs came into linkage to 
form the pro-type of type-1 S-locus in the common ancestor of eudicots. 
Furthermore, we detected a pleiotropic cis-transcription factor (TF) associated 
with regulating the expression of SLFs, and two miRNAs may control the 
expression of this TF. Interspecific S-locus and intraspecific S-haplotype 
comparisons revealed the dynamic nature and polymorphism of the S-locus 
supergene mediated by continuous gene duplication, segmental translocation or 
loss, and TE-mediated transposition events. Our data provide an excellent 
resource for future research on the evolutionary studies of the S-RNase-based 
self-incompatibility system.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad080
PMCID: PMC10118302
PMID: 37014787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad060. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad060.

Identification of RNA Virus-Derived RdRp Sequences in Publicly Available 
Transcriptomic Data Sets.

Olendraite I(1), Brown K(1), Firth AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Virology, Department of Pathology, Addenbrookes Hospital, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

RNA viruses are abundant and highly diverse and infect all or most eukaryotic 
organisms. However, only a tiny fraction of the number and diversity of RNA 
virus species have been catalogued. To cost-effectively expand the diversity of 
known RNA virus sequences, we mined publicly available transcriptomic data sets. 
We developed 77 family-level Hidden Markov Model profiles for the viral 
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)-the only universal "hallmark" gene of RNA 
viruses. By using these to search the National Center for Biotechnology 
Information Transcriptome Shotgun Assembly database, we identified 5,867 contigs 
encoding RNA virus RdRps or fragments thereof and analyzed their diversity, 
taxonomic classification, phylogeny, and host associations. Our study expands 
the known diversity of RNA viruses, and the 77 curated RdRp Profile Hidden 
Markov Models provide a useful resource for the virus discovery community.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad060
PMCID: PMC10101049
PMID: 37014783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad079. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad079.

Neutral Models of De Novo Gene Emergence Suggest that Gene Evolution has a 
Preferred Trajectory.

Iyengar BR(1), Bornberg-Bauer E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Evolution and Biodiversity, University of Münster, Münster, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Protein Evolution, Max Planck Institute for Biology Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.

New protein coding genes can emerge from genomic regions that previously did not 
contain any genes, via a process called de novo gene emergence. To synthesize a 
protein, DNA must be transcribed as well as translated. Both processes need 
certain DNA sequence features. Stable transcription requires promoters and a 
polyadenylation signal, while translation requires at least an open reading 
frame. We develop mathematical models based on mutation probabilities, and the 
assumption of neutral evolution, to find out how quickly genes emerge and are 
lost. We also investigate the effect of the order by which DNA features evolve, 
and if sequence composition is biased by mutation rate. We rationalize how genes 
are lost much more rapidly than they emerge, and how they preferentially arise 
in regions that are already transcribed. Our study not only answers some 
fundamental questions on the topic of de novo emergence but also provides a 
modeling framework for future studies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad079
PMCID: PMC10118301
PMID: 37011142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad067. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad067.

Interplay Between Polymorphic Short Tandem Repeats and Gene Expression Variation 
in Caenorhabditis elegans.

Zhang G(1), Andersen EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.

Short tandem repeats (STRs) have orders of magnitude higher mutation rates than 
single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and have been proposed to accelerate evolution 
in many organisms. However, only few studies have addressed the impact of STR 
variation on phenotypic variation at both the organismal and molecular levels. 
Potential driving forces underlying the high mutation rates of STRs also remain 
largely unknown. Here, we leverage the recently generated expression and STR 
variation data among wild Caenorhabditis elegans strains to conduct a 
genome-wide analysis of how STRs affect gene expression variation. We identify 
thousands of expression STRs (eSTRs) showing regulatory effects and demonstrate 
that they explain missing heritability beyond SNV-based expression quantitative 
trait loci. We illustrate specific regulatory mechanisms such as how eSTRs 
affect splicing sites and alternative splicing efficiency. We also show that 
differential expression of antioxidant genes and oxidative stresses might affect 
STR mutations systematically using both wild strains and mutation accumulation 
lines. Overall, we reveal the interplay between STRs and gene expression 
variation by providing novel insights into regulatory mechanisms of STRs and 
highlighting that oxidative stress could lead to higher STR mutation rates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad067
PMCID: PMC10075192
PMID: 36999565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad075. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad075.

DrosOmics: A Browser to Explore -omics Variation Across High-Quality Reference 
Genomes From Natural Populations of Drosophila melanogaster.

Coronado-Zamora M(1), Salces-Ortiz J(1), González J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, CSIC, UPF, Barcelona, Spain.

The advent of long-read sequencing technologies has allowed the generation of 
multiple high-quality de novo genome assemblies for multiple species, including 
well-known model species such as Drosophila melanogaster. Genome assemblies for 
multiple individuals of the same species are key to discover the genetic 
diversity present in natural populations, especially the one generated by 
transposable elements, the most common type of structural variant. Despite the 
availability of multiple genomic data sets for D. melanogaster populations, we 
lack an efficient visual tool to display different genome assemblies 
simultaneously. In this work, we present DrosOmics, a population 
genomic-oriented browser currently containing 52 high-quality reference genomes 
of D. melanogaster, including annotations from a highly reliable set of 
transposable elements, and functional transcriptomics and epigenomics data for 
26 genomes. DrosOmics is based on JBrowse 2, a highly scalable platform, which 
allows the visualization of multiple assemblies at once, key to unraveling 
structural and functional features of D. melanogaster natural populations. 
DrosOmics is an open access browser and is freely available at 
http://gonzalezlab.eu/drosomics.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad075
PMCID: PMC10089646
PMID: 36971243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad072. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad072.

Strong Positive Selection in Aedes aegypti and the Rapid Evolution of 
Insecticide Resistance.

Love RR(1), Sikder JR(1), Vivero RJ(2), Matute DR(3), Schrider DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NCUSA.
(2)Programa de Estudio y Control de Enfermedades Tropicales, PECET, Universidad 
de Antioquia, Chapel Hill, NCColombia.
(3)Department of Biology, College of Arts and Sciences, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Aedes aegypti vectors the pathogens that cause dengue, yellow fever, Zika virus, 
and chikungunya and is a serious threat to public health in tropical regions. 
Decades of work has illuminated many aspects of Ae. aegypti's biology and global 
population structure and has identified insecticide resistance genes; however, 
the size and repetitive nature of the Ae. aegypti genome have limited our 
ability to detect positive selection in this mosquito. Combining new whole 
genome sequences from Colombia with publicly available data from Africa and the 
Americas, we identify multiple strong candidate selective sweeps in Ae. aegypti, 
many of which overlap genes linked to or implicated in insecticide resistance. 
We examine the voltage-gated sodium channel gene in three American cohorts and 
find evidence for successive selective sweeps in Colombia. The most recent sweep 
encompasses an intermediate-frequency haplotype containing four candidate 
insecticide resistance mutations that are in near-perfect linkage disequilibrium 
with one another in the Colombian sample. We hypothesize that this haplotype may 
continue to rapidly increase in frequency and perhaps spread geographically in 
the coming years. These results extend our knowledge of how insecticide 
resistance has evolved in this species and add to a growing body of evidence 
suggesting that Ae. aegypti has an extensive genomic capacity to rapidly adapt 
to insecticide-based vector control.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad072
PMCID: PMC10118305
PMID: 36971242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad076. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad076.

Ancient and Nonuniform Loss of Olfactory Receptor Expression Renders the Shark 
Nose a De Facto Vomeronasal Organ.

Syed AS(1), Sharma K(1), Policarpo M(2), Ferrando S(3)(4), Casane D(2)(5), 
Korsching SI(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetics, Mathematical-Natural Sciences Faculty, University of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Évolution, Génomes, Comportement et Écologie, Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, 
IRD, UMR, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(3)Department of Earth, Environmental, and Life Sciences (DISTAV), University of 
Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(4)NBFC, National Biodiversity Future Center, Palermo, Italy.
(5)UFR Sciences du Vivant, Université Paris Cité, Paris, France.

Cartilaginous fishes are renowned for a keen sense of smell, a reputation based 
on behavioral observations and supported by the presence of large and 
morphologically complex olfactory organs. At the molecular level, genes 
belonging to the four families coding for most olfactory chemosensory receptors 
in other vertebrates have been identified in a chimera and a shark, but it was 
unknown whether they actually code for olfactory receptors in these species. 
Here, we describe the evolutionary dynamics of these gene families in 
cartilaginous fishes using genomes of a chimera, a skate, a sawfish, and eight 
sharks. The number of putative OR, TAAR, and V1R/ORA receptors is very low and 
stable, whereas the number of putative V2R/OlfC receptors is higher and much 
more dynamic. In the catshark Scyliorhinus canicula, we show that many V2R/OlfC 
receptors are expressed in the olfactory epithelium in the sparsely distributed 
pattern characteristic for olfactory receptors. In contrast, the other three 
vertebrate olfactory receptor families are either not expressed (OR) or only 
represented with a single receptor (V1R/ORA and TAAR). The complete overlap of 
markers of microvillous olfactory sensory neurons with pan-neuronal marker HuC 
in the olfactory organ suggests the same cell-type specificity of V2R/OlfC 
expression as for bony fishes, that is, in microvillous neurons. The relatively 
low number of olfactory receptors in cartilaginous fishes compared with bony 
fishes could be the result of an ancient and constant selection in favor of a 
high olfactory sensitivity at the expense of a high discrimination capability.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad076
PMCID: PMC10116579
PMID: 36971115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad065. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad065.

Correction to: Population Genetic Considerations Regarding Evidence for Biased 
Mutation Rates in Arabidopsis thaliana.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad065
PMCID: PMC10037163
PMID: 36960744


313. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad064. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad064.

Stop or Not: Genome-Wide Profiling of Reassigned Stop Codons in Ciliates.

Chen W(1)(2), Geng Y(3), Zhang B(1)(2), Yan Y(4), Zhao F(1)(2)(3), Miao M(1).

Author information:
(1)Savaid Medical School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Yunnan Key Laboratory of Plant Reproductive Adaptation and Evolutionary 
Ecology, School of Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Yunnan University, 
Kunming, China.
(4)Institute of Evolution and Marine Biodiversity, Ocean University of China, 
Qingdao, China.

Bifunctional stop codons that have both translation and termination functions in 
the same species are important for understanding the evolution and function of 
genetic codes in living organisms. Considering the high frequency of 
bifunctional codons but limited number of available genomes in ciliates, we de 
novo sequenced seven representative ciliate genomes to explore the evolutionary 
history of stop codons. We further propose a stop codon reassignment 
quantification method (stopCR) that can identify bifunctional codons and measure 
their frequencies in various eukaryotic organisms. Using our newly developed 
method, we found two previously undescribed genetic codes, illustrating the 
prevalence of bifunctional stop codons in ciliates. Overall, evolutionary 
genomic analyses suggest that gain or loss of reassigned stop codons in ciliates 
is shaped by their living environment, the eukaryotic release factor 1, and 
suppressor tRNAs. This study provides novel clues about the functional diversity 
and evolutionary history of stop codons in eukaryotic organisms.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad064
PMCID: PMC10089648
PMID: 36952281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad073. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad073.

Differential Retention of Pfam Domains Contributes to Long-term Evolutionary 
Trends.

James JE(1)(2), Nelson PG(1), Masel J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ.
(2)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Protein domains that emerged more recently in evolution have a higher structural 
disorder and greater clustering of hydrophobic residues along the primary 
sequence. It is hard to explain how selection acting via descent with 
modification could act so slowly as not to saturate over the extraordinarily 
long timescales over which these trends persist. Here, we hypothesize that the 
trends were created by a higher level of selection that differentially affects 
the retention probabilities of protein domains with different properties. This 
hypothesis predicts that loss rates should depend on disorder and clustering 
trait values. To test this, we inferred loss rates via maximum likelihood for 
animal Pfam domains, after first performing a set of stringent quality control 
methods to reduce annotation errors. Intermediate trait values, matching those 
of ancient domains, are associated with the lowest loss rates, making our 
results difficult to explain with reference to previously described homology 
detection biases. Simulations confirm that effect sizes are of the right 
magnitude to produce the observed long-term trends. Our results support the 
hypothesis that differential domain loss slowly weeds out those protein domains 
that have nonoptimal levels of disorder and clustering. The same preferences 
also shape the differential diversification of Pfam domains, thereby further 
impacting proteome composition.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad073
PMCID: PMC10089649
PMID: 36947137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad074. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad074.

Localizing Post-Admixture Adaptive Variants with Object Detection on 
Ancestry-Painted Chromosomes.

Hamid I(1), Korunes KL(1), Schrider DR(2), Goldberg A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, Duke University, Durham, NC.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Gene flow between previously differentiated populations during the founding of 
an admixed or hybrid population has the potential to introduce adaptive alleles 
into the new population. If the adaptive allele is common in one source 
population, but not the other, then as the adaptive allele rises in frequency in 
the admixed population, genetic ancestry from the source containing the adaptive 
allele will increase nearby as well. Patterns of genetic ancestry have therefore 
been used to identify post-admixture positive selection in humans and other 
animals, including examples in immunity, metabolism, and animal coloration. A 
common method identifies regions of the genome that have local ancestry 
"outliers" compared with the distribution across the rest of the genome, 
considering each locus independently. However, we lack theoretical models for 
expected distributions of ancestry under various demographic scenarios, 
resulting in potential false positives and false negatives. Further, ancestry 
patterns between distant sites are often not independent. As a result, current 
methods tend to infer wide genomic regions containing many genes as under 
selection, limiting biological interpretation. Instead, we develop a deep 
learning object detection method applied to images generated from local 
ancestry-painted genomes. This approach preserves information from the 
surrounding genomic context and avoids potential pitfalls of user-defined 
summary statistics. We find the method is robust to a variety of demographic 
misspecifications using simulated data. Applied to human genotype data from Cabo 
Verde, we localize a known adaptive locus to a single narrow region compared 
with multiple or long windows obtained using two other ancestry-based methods.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad074
PMCID: PMC10116606
PMID: 36947126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad070. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad070.

An Assessment of Quaternary Structure Functionality in Homomer Protein 
Complexes.

Abrusán G(1), Foguet C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, School of Medicine, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

It has been recently suggested that a significant fraction of homomer 
protein-protein interfaces evolve neutrally, without contributing to function, 
due to a hydrophobic bias in missense mutations. However, the fraction of such 
gratuitous complexes is currently unknown. Here, we quantified the fraction of 
homodimers where multimerization is unlikely to contribute to their biochemical 
function. We show that: 1) ligand binding-site structure predicts whether a 
homomer is functional or not; the vast majority of homodimers with multichain 
binding-sites (MBS) are likely to be functional, while in homodimers with 
single-chain binding-sites (SBS) and small to medium interfaces, quaternary 
structure is unlikely to be functional in a significant fraction-35%, even up to 
42%-of complexes; 2) the hydrophobicity of interfaces changes little with the 
strength of selection, and the amino acid composition of interfaces is shaped by 
the "hydrophobic ratchet" in both types, but they are not in a strict 
equilibrium with mutations; particularly cysteines are much more abundant in 
mutations than in interfaces or surfaces; 3) in MBS homomers, the interfaces are 
conserved, while in a high fraction of SBS homomers, the interface is not more 
conserved than the solvent-accessible surface; and 4) MBS homomer interfaces 
coevolve more strongly with ligand binding sites than the interfaces of SBS 
homomers, and MBS complexes have higher capacity to transfer information from 
ligands across the interfaces than SBS homomers, explaining the enrichment of 
allostery in the former.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad070
PMCID: PMC10118308
PMID: 36947103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad068. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad068.

High Nucleotide Diversity Accompanies Differential DNA Methylation in Naturally 
Diverging Populations.

Ord J(1)(2), Gossmann TI(3), Adrian-Kalchhauser I(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Fish and Wildlife Health, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Computational Systems Biology, Faculty of Biochemical and Chemical 
Engineering, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany.

Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation (DNAme) are thought to comprise an 
invaluable adaptive toolkit in the early stages of local adaptation, especially 
when genetic diversity is constrained. However, the link between genetic 
diversity and DNAme has been scarcely examined in natural populations, despite 
its potential to shed light on the evolutionary forces acting on methylation 
state. Here, we analyzed reduced-representation bisulfite sequencing and 
whole-genome pool-seq data from marine and freshwater stickleback populations to 
examine the relationship between DNAme variation (between- and 
within-population) and nucleotide diversity in the context of freshwater 
adaptation. We find that sites that are differentially methylated between 
populations have higher underlying standing genetic variation, with diversity 
higher among sites that gained methylation in freshwater than those that lost 
it. Strikingly, although nucleotide diversity is generally lower in the 
freshwater population as expected from a population bottleneck, this is not the 
case for sites that lost methylation, which instead have elevated nucleotide 
diversity in freshwater compared with marine. Subsequently, we show that 
nucleotide diversity is higher among sites with ancestrally variable methylation 
and also positively correlates with the sensitivity to environmentally induced 
methylation change. The results suggest that as selection on the control of 
methylation state becomes relaxed, so too does selection against mutations at 
the sites themselves. Increased epigenetic variance in a population is therefore 
likely to precede genetic diversification.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad068
PMCID: PMC10139703
PMID: 36947101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad071. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad071.

Functional Evolution of Clustered Aquaporin Genes Reveals Insights into the 
Oceanic Success of Teleost Eggs.

Ferré A(1), Chauvigné F(2), Vlasova A(3), Norberg B(4), Bargelloni L(5), Guigó 
R(3)(6), Finn RN(1)(7), Cerdà J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Agrifood Research and Technology (IRTA)-Institute of 
Biotechnology and Biomedicine (IBB), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute of Marine Sciences, Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institute of Marine Research, Austevoll Research Station, Storebø, Norway.
(5)Department of Comparative Biomedicine and Food Science (BCA), University of 
Padova, Legnaro, PD, Italy.
(6)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Department of Biology, Bergen High Technology Centre, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.

Aquaporin-mediated oocyte hydration is considered important for the evolution of 
pelagic eggs and the radiative success of marine teleosts. However, the 
molecular regulatory mechanisms controlling this vital process are not fully 
understood. Here, we analyzed >400 piscine genomes to uncover a previously 
unknown teleost-specific aquaporin-1 cluster (TSA1C) comprised of tandemly 
arranged aqp1aa-aqp1ab2-aqp1ab1 genes. Functional evolutionary analysis of the 
TSA1C reveals a ∼300-million-year history of downstream aqp1ab-type gene loss, 
neofunctionalization, and subfunctionalization, but with marine species that 
spawn highly hydrated pelagic eggs almost exclusively retaining at least one of 
the downstream paralogs. Unexpectedly, one-third of the modern marine 
euacanthomorph teleosts selectively retain both aqp1ab-type channels and 
co-evolved protein kinase-mediated phosphorylation sites in the intracellular 
subdomains together with teleost-specific Ywhaz-like (14-3-3ζ-like) binding 
proteins for co-operative membrane trafficking regulation. To understand the 
selective evolutionary advantages of these mechanisms, we show that a two-step 
regulated channel shunt avoids competitive occupancy of the same plasma membrane 
space in the oocyte and accelerates hydration. These data suggest that the 
evolution of the adaptive molecular regulatory features of the TSA1C facilitated 
the rise of pelagic eggs and their subsequent geodispersal in the oceanic 
currents.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad071
PMCID: PMC10075191
PMID: 36947084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad066. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad066.

Duplication and Losses of Opsin Genes in Lophotrochozoan Evolution.

De Vivo G(1), Crocetta F(2), Ferretti M(1), Feuda R(3), D'Aniello S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Evolution of Marine Organisms (BEOM), Stazione 
Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Napoli, Italy.
(2)Department of Integrative Marine Ecology (EMI), Stazione Zoologica Anton 
Dohrn, Napoli, Italy.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, United Kingdom.

Opsins are G-coupled receptors playing a key role in metazoan visual processes. 
While many studies enriched our understanding of opsin diversity in several 
animal clades, the opsin evolution in Lophotrochozoa, one of the major metazoan 
groups, remains poorly understood. Using recently developed phylogenetic 
approaches, we investigated the opsin evolution in 74 lophotrochozoan genomes. 
We found that the common ancestor of Lophotrochozoa possessed at least seven 
opsin paralog groups that underwent divergent evolutionary history in the 
different phyla. Furthermore, we showed for the first time opsin-related 
molecules in Bilateria that we named pseudopsins, which may prove critical in 
uncovering opsin evolution.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad066
PMCID: PMC10097855
PMID: 36947081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad069. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad069.

Transposable Element Interactions Shape the Ecology of the Deer Mouse Genome.

Gozashti L(1), Feschotte C(2), Hoekstra HE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organismic & Evolutionary Biology, Department of Molecular & 
Cellular Biology, Museum of Comparative Zoology and Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology & Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.

The genomic landscape of transposable elements (TEs) varies dramatically across 
species, with some TEs demonstrating greater success in colonizing particular 
lineages than others. In mammals, long interspersed nuclear element (LINE) 
retrotransposons are typically more common than any other TE. Here, we report an 
unusual genomic landscape of TEs in the deer mouse, Peromyscus maniculatus. In 
contrast to other previously examined mammals, long terminal repeat elements 
occupy more of the deer mouse genome than LINEs (11% and 10%, respectively). 
This pattern reflects a combination of relatively low LINE activity and a 
massive invasion of lineage-specific endogenous retroviruses (ERVs). Deer mouse 
ERVs exhibit diverse origins spanning the retroviral phylogeny suggesting they 
have been host to a wide range of exogenous retroviruses. Notably, we trace the 
origin of one ERV lineage, which arose ∼5-18 million years ago, to a close 
relative of feline leukemia virus, revealing inter-ordinal horizontal 
transmission. Several lineage-specific ERV subfamilies have very high copy 
numbers, with the top five most abundant accounting for ∼2% of the genome. We 
also observe a massive amplification of Kruppel-associated box domain-containing 
zinc finger genes, which likely control ERV activity and whose expansion may 
have been facilitated by ectopic recombination between ERVs. Finally, we find 
evidence that ERVs directly impacted the evolutionary trajectory of LINEs by 
outcompeting them for genomic sites and frequently disrupting autonomous LINE 
copies. Together, our results illuminate the genomic ecology that shaped the 
unique deer mouse TE landscape, shedding light on the evolutionary processes 
that give rise to variation in mammalian genome structure.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad069
PMCID: PMC10089650
PMID: 36947073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad062. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad062.

Large-Scale Identification of Known and Novel RRNPP Quorum-Sensing Systems by 
RRNPP_Detector Captures Novel Features of Bacterial, Plasmidic, and Viral 
Coevolution.

Bernard C(1)(2)(3), Li Y(2), Lopez P(1), Bapteste E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Systématique, Évolution, Biodiversité (ISYEB), Sorbonne 
Université, CNRS, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.
(2)Unité Molécules de Communication et Adaptation des Micro-organismes (MCAM), 
CNRS, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Genopode, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Gram-positive Firmicutes bacteria and their mobile genetic elements (plasmids 
and bacteriophages) encode peptide-based quorum-sensing systems (QSSs) that 
orchestrate behavioral transitions as a function of population densities. In 
their simplest form, termed "RRNPP", these QSSs are composed of two adjacent 
genes: a communication propeptide and its cognate intracellular receptor. RRNPP 
QSSs notably regulate social/competitive behaviors such as virulence or biofilm 
formation in bacteria, conjugation in plasmids, or lysogeny in temperate 
bacteriophages. However, the genetic diversity and the prevalence of these 
communication systems, together with the breadth of behaviors they control, 
remain largely underappreciated. To better assess the impact of density 
dependency on microbial community dynamics and evolution, we developed the 
RRNPP_detector software, which predicts known and novel RRNPP QSSs in 
chromosomes, plasmids, and bacteriophages of Firmicutes. Applying RRNPP_detector 
against available complete genomes of viruses and Firmicutes, we identified a 
rich repertoire of RRNPP QSSs from 11 already known subfamilies and 21 novel 
high-confidence candidate subfamilies distributed across a vast diversity of 
taxa. The analysis of high-confidence RRNPP subfamilies notably revealed 14 
subfamilies shared between chromosomes/plasmids/phages, 181 plasmids and 82 
phages encoding multiple communication systems, phage-encoded QSSs predicted to 
dynamically modulate bacterial behaviors, and 196 candidate biosynthetic gene 
clusters under density-dependent regulation. Overall, our work enhances the 
field of quorum-sensing research and reveals novel insights into the coevolution 
of gram-positive bacteria and their mobile genetic elements.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad062
PMCID: PMC10075063
PMID: 36929912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad061. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad061.

Evolutionary Trajectories are Contingent on Mitonuclear Interactions.

Biot-Pelletier D(1)(2)(3)(4), Bettinazzi S(5), Gagnon-Arsenault 
I(1)(2)(3)(4)(6), Dubé AK(1)(2)(3)(4)(6), Bédard C(1)(2)(3)(4), Nguyen THM(7), 
Fiumera HL(7), Breton S(5), Landry CR(1)(2)(3)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institut de biologie intégrative et des systèmes, Université Laval, Québec, 
QC, Canada.
(2)Département de biologie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(3)Centre de recherche en données massives (CRDM), Université Laval, Québec, QC, 
Canada.
(4)PROTEO, le regroupement québécois de recherche sur la fonction, l'ingénierie 
et les applications des protéines, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(5)Département de sciences biologiques, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, 
Canada.
(6)Département de biochimie, microbiologie et bio-informatique, Université 
Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, Binghamton University, Binghamton, NY, 
USA.

Critical mitochondrial functions, including cellular respiration, rely on 
frequently interacting components expressed from both the mitochondrial and 
nuclear genomes. The fitness of eukaryotic organisms depends on a tight 
collaboration between both genomes. In the face of an elevated rate of evolution 
in mtDNA, current models predict that the maintenance of mitonuclear 
compatibility relies on compensatory evolution of the nuclear genome. 
Mitonuclear interactions would therefore exert an influence on evolutionary 
trajectories. One prediction from this model is that the same nuclear genome 
evolving with different mitochondrial haplotypes would follow distinct molecular 
paths toward higher fitness. To test this prediction, we submitted 1,344 
populations derived from 7 mitonuclear genotypes of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to 
>300 generations of experimental evolution in conditions that either select for 
a mitochondrial function or do not strictly require respiration for survival. 
Performing high-throughput phenotyping and whole-genome sequencing on 
independently evolved individuals, we identified numerous examples of gene-level 
evolutionary convergence among populations with the same mitonuclear background. 
Phenotypic and genotypic data on strains derived from this evolution experiment 
identify the nuclear genome and the environment as the main determinants of 
evolutionary divergence, but also show a modulating role for the mitochondrial 
genome exerted both directly and via interactions with the two other components. 
We finally recapitulated a subset of prominent loss-of-function alleles in the 
ancestral backgrounds and confirmed a generalized pattern of 
mitonuclear-specific and highly epistatic fitness effects. Together, these 
results demonstrate how mitonuclear interactions can dictate evolutionary 
divergence of populations with identical starting nuclear genotypes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad061
PMCID: PMC10072823
PMID: 36929911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad063. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad063.

Diversified Mammalian Visuasl Adaptations to Bright- or Dim-Light Environments.

Gai Y(1), Tian R(1), Liu F(2)(3), Mu Y(1), Shan L(1), Irwin DM(4), Liu Y(2), Xu 
S(1), Yang G(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Biotechnology, College of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural 
University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Photic niche shifts of mammals are associated with changing visual capabilities, 
primarily mediated by three visual pigments, two (SWS1 and M/LWS) of them for 
color vision and rhodopsin (RH1) for dim-light vision. To further elucidate 
molecular mechanisms of mammalian visual adaptations to different light 
environments, a systematic study incorporating evolutionary analyses across 
diverse groups and in vitro assays have been carried out. Here, we collected 
gene sequences for the three opsins from 220 species covering all major 
mammalian clades. After screening for cone opsin gene losses, we estimated 
selective pressures on each of the three genes and compared the levels of 
selection experienced by species living in bright- and dim-light environments. 
SWS1 pigment is shown to experience accelerated evolution in species living in 
bright-light environments as has RH1 in aquatic cetaceans, indicating potential 
shifts for ecological adaptations. To further elucidate the functional 
mechanisms for these two pigments, we then carried out site-directed mutagenesis 
in representative taxa. For SWS1, violet and ultraviolet sensitivities in the 
pika and mouse are mainly affected by substitutions at the critical sites 86 and 
93, which have strong epistatic interaction. For RH1, the phenotypic difference 
between the sperm whale and bovine sequences is largely contributed by a 
substitution at site 195, which could be critical for dim-light sensation for 
deep-diving species. Different evolutionary patterns for the visual pigments 
have been identified in mammals, which correspond to photic niches, although 
additional phenotypic assays are still required to fully explain the functional 
mechanisms.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad063
PMCID: PMC10075062
PMID: 36929909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad059. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad059.

Intergenic Regions of Saccharomycotina Yeasts are Enriched in Potential to 
Encode Transmembrane Domains.

Tassios E(1)(2), Nikolaou C(1), Vakirlis N(3).

Author information:
(1)Computational Genomics Group, Institute for Bioinnovation, Biomedical 
Sciences Research Center "Alexander Fleming", Vari, Greece.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(3)Evolutionary Genomics Lab, Institute for Fundamental Biomedical Research, 
Biomedical Sciences Research Center "Alexander Fleming", Vari, Greece.

Intergenic genomic regions have essential regulatory and structural roles that 
impose constraints on their sequences. But regions that do not currently encode 
proteins also carry the potential to do so in the future. De novo gene 
emergence, the evolution of novel genes out of previously noncoding sequences 
has now been established as a potent force for genomic novelty. Recently, it was 
shown that intergenic regions in the genome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae harbor 
pervasive cryptic potential to, if theoretically translated, form transmembrane 
domains (TM domains) more frequently than expected by chance given their 
nucleotide composition, a property that we refer to as TM-forming enrichment. 
The source and biological relevance of this property is unknown. Here, we expand 
the investigation into the TM-forming potential of intergenic regions to the 
entire Saccharomycotina budding yeast subphylum, in an effort to explain this 
property and understand its importance. We find pervasive but variable 
enrichment in TM-forming potential across the subphylum regardless of the 
composition and average size of intergenic regions. This cryptic property is 
evenly spread across the genome, cannot be explained by the hydrophobic content 
of the sequence, and does not appear to localize to regions containing 
regulatory motifs. This TM-forming enrichment specifically, and not the actual 
TM-forming potential, is associated, across genomes, with more TM domains in 
evolutionarily young genes. Our findings shed light on this newly discovered 
feature of yeast genomes and constitute a first step toward understanding its 
evolutionary importance.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad059
PMCID: PMC10063215
PMID: 36917489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad051. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad051.

New Insights into the Evolution and Gene Structure of the Mitochondrial Carrier 
Family Unveiled by Analyzing the Frequent and Conserved Intron Positions.

Monné M(1)(2), Cianciulli A(1), Panaro MA(1), Calvello R(1), De Grassi A(1), 
Palmieri L(1)(3), Mitolo V(1), Palmieri F(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Environment, University of 
Bari, Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Sciences, University of Basilicata, Potenza, Italy.
(3)CNR Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnologies 
(IBIOM), Bari, Italy.

Mitochondrial carriers (MCs) belong to a eukaryotic protein family of 
transporters that in higher organisms is called the solute carrier family 25 
(SLC25). All MCs have characteristic triplicated sequence repeats forming a 
3-fold symmetrical structure of a six-transmembrane α-helix bundle with a 
centrally located substrate-binding site. Biochemical characterization has shown 
that MCs altogether transport a wide variety of substrates but can be divided 
into subfamilies, each transporting a few specific substrates. We have 
investigated the intron positions in the human MC genes and their orthologs of 
highly diversified organisms. The results demonstrate that several intron 
positions are present in numerous MC sequences at the same specific points, of 
which some are 3-fold symmetry related. Many of these frequent intron positions 
are also conserved in subfamilies or in groups of subfamilies transporting 
similar substrates. The analyses of the frequent and conserved intron positions 
in MCs suggest phylogenetic relationships not only between close but also 
distant homologs as well as a possible involvement of the intron positions in 
the evolution of the substrate specificity diversification of the MC family 
members.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad051
PMCID: PMC10027655
PMID: 36916992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad057. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad057.

Interpreting the Evolutionary Echoes of a Protein Complex Essential for 
Inner-Ear Mechanosensation.

Nisler CR(1)(2), Narui Y(3), Scheib E(1), Choudhary D(1), Bowman JD(4), Mandayam 
Bharathi H(1), Lynch VJ(4), Sotomayor M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 484 W 
12th Avenue, Columbus, OH.
(2)Biophysics Graduate Program, The Ohio State University, 484 W 12th Avenue, 
Columbus, OH.
(3)Center for Electron Microscopy and Analysis, The Ohio State University, 
1275-1305 Kinnear Road, Columbus, OH.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, SUNY, 551 Cooke 
Hall, Buffalo, NY, USA.

The sensory epithelium of the inner ear, found in all extant lineages of 
vertebrates, has been subjected to over 500 million years of evolution, 
resulting in the complex inner ear of modern vertebrates. Inner-ear adaptations 
are as diverse as the species in which they are found, and such unique 
anatomical variations have been well studied. However, the evolutionary details 
of the molecular machinery that is required for hearing are less well known. Two 
molecules that are essential for hearing in vertebrates are cadherin-23 and 
protocadherin-15, proteins whose interaction with one another acts as the focal 
point of force transmission when converting sound waves into electrical signals 
that the brain can interpret. This "tip-link" interaction exists in every 
lineage of vertebrates, but little is known about the structure or mechanical 
properties of these proteins in most non-mammalian lineages. Here, we use 
various techniques to characterize the evolution of this protein interaction. 
Results show how evolutionary sequence changes in this complex affect its 
biophysical properties both in simulations and experiments, with variations in 
interaction strength and dynamics among extant vertebrate lineages. Evolutionary 
simulations also characterize how the biophysical properties of the complex in 
turn constrain its evolution and provide a possible explanation for the increase 
in deafness-causing mutants observed in cadherin-23 relative to 
protocadherin-15. Together, these results suggest a general picture of tip-link 
evolution in which selection acted to modify the tip-link interface, although 
subsequent neutral evolution combined with varying degrees of purifying 
selection drove additional diversification in modern tetrapods.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad057
PMCID: PMC10089651
PMID: 36911992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad056. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad056.

Testosterone Coordinates Gene Expression Across Different Tissues to Produce 
Carotenoid-Based Red Ornamentation.

Khalil S(1)(2)(3), Enbody ED(4), Frankl-Vilches C(5), Welklin JF(6), Koch RE(7), 
Toomey MB(7), Sin SYW(8)(9)(10), Edwards SV(9)(10), Gahr M(5), Schwabl H(11), 
Webster MS(12)(13), Karubian J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Tulane University, New 
Orleans, LA, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY, USA.
(3)Fuller Evolutionary Biology Program, Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Behavioural Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Biological 
Intelligence, Seewiesen, Germany.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, USA.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Tulsa, Tulsa, OK, USA.
(8)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(9)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(10)Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(11)School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 
USA.
(12)Macaulay Library, Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(13)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 
USA.

Carotenoid pigments underlie most of the red, orange, and yellow visual signals 
used in mate choice in vertebrates. However, many of the underlying processes 
surrounding the production of carotenoid-based traits remain unclear due to the 
complex nature of carotenoid uptake, metabolism, and deposition across tissues. 
Here, we leverage the ability to experimentally induce the production of a 
carotenoid-based red plumage patch in the red-backed fairywren (Malurus 
melanocephalus), a songbird in which red plumage is an important male sexual 
signal. We experimentally elevated testosterone in unornamented males lacking 
red plumage to induce the production of ornamentation and compared gene 
expression in both the liver and feather follicles between unornamented control 
males, testosterone-implanted males, and naturally ornamented males. We show 
that testosterone upregulates the expression of CYP2J19, a gene known to be 
involved in ketocarotenoid metabolism, and a putative carotenoid processing gene 
(ELOVL6) in the liver, and also regulates the expression of putative carotenoid 
transporter genes in red feather follicles on the back, including ABCG1. In 
black feathers, carotenoid-related genes are downregulated and melanin genes 
upregulated, but we find that carotenoids are still present in the feathers. 
This may be due to the activity of the carotenoid-cleaving enzyme BCO2 in black 
feathers. Our study provides a first working model of a pathway for 
carotenoid-based trait production in free-living birds, implicates testosterone 
as a key regulator of carotenoid-associated gene expression, and suggests 
hormones may coordinate the many processes that underlie the production of these 
traits across multiple tissues.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad056
PMCID: PMC10072822
PMID: 36911907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad050. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad050.

Massive Somatic and Germline Chromosomal Integrations of Polydnaviruses in 
Lepidopterans.

Heisserer C(1)(2), Muller H(1), Jouan V(3), Musset K(2), Periquet G(2), Drezen 
JM(2), Volkoff AN(3), Gilbert C(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, IRD, UMR Évolution, Génomes, Comportement et 
Écologie, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)UMR 7261 CNRS, Institut de Recherche sur la Biologie de l'Insecte, Faculté 
des Sciences et Techniques, Université de Tours, Tours, France.
(3)DGIMI, INRAE, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Increasing numbers of horizontal transfer (HT) of genes and transposable 
elements are reported in insects. Yet the mechanisms underlying these transfers 
remain unknown. Here we first quantify and characterize the patterns of 
chromosomal integration of the polydnavirus (PDV) encoded by the Campopleginae 
Hyposoter didymator parasitoid wasp (HdIV) in somatic cells of parasitized fall 
armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda). PDVs are domesticated viruses injected by 
wasps together with their eggs into their hosts in order to facilitate the 
development of wasp larvae. We found that six HdIV DNA circles integrate into 
the genome of host somatic cells. Each host haploid genome suffers between 23 
and 40 integration events (IEs) on average 72 h post-parasitism. Almost all IEs 
are mediated by DNA double-strand breaks occurring in the host integration motif 
(HIM) of HdIV circles. We show that despite their independent evolutionary 
origins, PDV from both Campopleginae and Braconidae wasps use remarkably similar 
mechanisms for chromosomal integration. Next, our similarity search performed on 
775 genomes reveals that PDVs of both Campopleginae and Braconidae wasps have 
recurrently colonized the germline of dozens of lepidopteran species through the 
same mechanisms they use to integrate into somatic host chromosomes during 
parasitism. We found evidence of HIM-mediated HT of PDV DNA circles in no less 
than 124 species belonging to 15 lepidopteran families. Thus, this mechanism 
underlies a major route of HT of genetic material from wasps to lepidopterans 
with likely important consequences on lepidopterans.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad050
PMCID: PMC10025437
PMID: 36881879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad054. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad054.

Comparative Genomic and Transcriptomic Analyses Reveal the Impacts of Genetic 
Admixture in Kazaks, Uyghurs, and Huis.

Pan Y(1), Wen J(2)(3), Ning Z(1), Yuan Y(1), Liu X(1), Yang Y(2), Guan Y(4), Lu 
Y(2), Mamatyusupu D(5), Xu S(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and 
Health, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Center for Evolutionary Biology, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and Development, School of Life 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Human Phenome Institute, Zhangjiang Fudan International Innovation Center, 
and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Preclinical Medicine 
College, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, China.
(5)College of the Life Sciences and Technology, Xinjiang University, Urumqi, 
China.
(6)Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation Liver Cancer Institute, 
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Population admixture results in the combinations of genetic components derived 
from distinct ancestral populations, which may impact diversity at the genetic, 
transcriptomic, and phenotypic levels, as well as postadmixture adaptive 
evolution. Here, we systematically investigated the genomic and transcriptomic 
diversity in Kazaks, Uyghurs, and Huis-three admixed populations of various 
Eurasian ancestries living in Xinjiang, China. All three populations showed 
elevated genetic diversity and closer genetic distance compared with the 
reference populations across the Eurasian continent. However, we also observed 
differentiated genomic diversity and inferred different demographic histories 
among the three populations. Varying ancestry proportions observed in both the 
global and local aspects corresponded to the population-differentiated genomic 
diversity, with the most representative signals observed in the genes EDAR, 
SULT1C4, and SLC24A5. The varying local ancestry partly resulted from the 
postadmixture local adaptation, with the most significant signals observed in 
immunity- and metabolism-related pathways. Admixture-shaped genomic diversity 
further influenced the transcriptomic diversity in the admixed populations; in 
particular, population-specific regulatory effects were associated with 
immunity- and metabolism-involved genes such as MTHFR, FCER1G, SDHC, and BDH2. 
Furthermore, differentially expressed genes between the populations were 
identified, many of which could be explained by the population-specific 
regulatory properties, including genes related to health concerns (e.g., AHI1 
between Kazak and Uyghurs [P < 6.92 × 10-5] and CTRC between Huis and Uyghurs [P 
< 2.32 × 10-4]). Our results demonstrate genetic admixture as a driving force in 
shaping the genomic and transcriptomic diversity of human populations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad054
PMCID: PMC10025583
PMID: 36869755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.


330. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad053. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad053.

Limited Song Mixing Without Genomic Gene Flow in a Contact Zone Between Two 
Songbird Species.

Wu L(1)(2), Dang J(1), Tang L(1), Cheng Y(1), Song G(1), Sun Y(3), Martens J(4), 
Päckert M(5), Alström P(1)(6), Zhang D(1), Jia C(1), Lei F(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Institut für Organismische und Molekulare Evolutionsbiologie (iomE), Johannes 
Gutenberg Universität, Mainz, Germany.
(5)Senckenberg Naturhistorische Sammlungen, Dresden, Germany.
(6)Animal Ecology, Department of Ecology and Genetics, Evolutionary Biology 
Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(7)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Song is considered to play an important role in the maintenance of prezygotic 
reproductive isolation between closely related songbird species. Therefore, song 
mixing in a contact zone between closely related species is often considered as 
evidence of hybridization. The Sichuan Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus forresti and 
the Gansu Leaf Warbler Phylloscopus kansuensis, which diverged 2 million years 
ago, have formed a contact zone in the south of the Gansu Province of China, 
where mixed songs have been observed. In this study, we investigated the 
potential causes and consequences of song mixing by integrating bioacoustic, 
morphological, mitochondrial, and genomic data with field ecological 
observations. We found that the two species display no apparent morphological 
differences, whereas their songs differ dramatically. We demonstrated that ∼11% 
of the males in the contact zone sang mixed songs. Two males singing mixed song 
were genotyped, and both were found to be P. kansuensis. Despite the presence of 
mixed singers, population genomic analyses detected no signs of recent gene flow 
between the two species, although two possible cases of mitochondrial 
introgression were identified. We conclude that the rather limited song mixing 
does not lead to, or result from, hybridization, and hence does not result in 
the breakdown of reproductive barriers between these cryptic species.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad053
PMCID: PMC10050365
PMID: 36869752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare no competing interests.


331. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad048. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad048.

Polishing De Novo Nanopore Assemblies of Bacteria and Eukaryotes With FMLRC2.

Mak QXC(1), Wick RR(2), Holt JM(3), Wang JR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Centre for Pathogen Genomics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Pacific Biosciences, Inc., Menlo Park, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.

As the accuracy and throughput of nanopore sequencing improve, it is 
increasingly common to perform long-read first de novo genome assemblies 
followed by polishing with accurate short reads. We briefly introduce FMLRC2, 
the successor to the original FM-index Long Read Corrector (FMLRC), and 
illustrate its performance as a fast and accurate de novo assembly polisher for 
both bacterial and eukaryotic genomes.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad048
PMCID: PMC10015616
PMID: 36869750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad052. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad052.

Global Dynamics of Porcine Enteric Coronavirus PEDV Epidemiology, Evolution, and 
Transmission.

Zhang H(1), Zou C(1), Peng O(1), Ashraf U(2), Xu Q(3), Gong L(1)(4), Fan B(5), 
Zhang Y(1), Xu Z(1), Xue C(1), Wei X(1)(6), Zhou Q(6), Tian X(6), Shen H(6), Li 
B(5)(7), Zhang X(6)(8), Cao Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Life Sciences School, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene 
Regulation, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis Prevention and Control of Guangdong Province, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(5)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biological Engineering and Technology, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Nanjing, China.
(6)Guangdong Enterprise Key Laboratory for Animal Health and Environmental 
Control, Wen's Group Academy, Wen's Foodstuff Group Co. Ltd, Yunfu, China.
(7)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal 
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(8)College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 
China.

With a possible origin from bats, the alphacoronavirus Porcine epidemic diarrhea 
virus (PEDV) causes significant hazards and widespread epidemics in the swine 
population. However, the ecology, evolution, and spread of PEDV are still 
unclear. Here, from 149,869 fecal and intestinal tissue samples of pigs 
collected in an 11-year survey, we identified PEDV as the most dominant virus in 
diarrheal animals. Global whole genomic and evolutionary analyses of 672 PEDV 
strains revealed the fast-evolving PEDV genotype 2 (G2) strains as the main 
epidemic viruses worldwide, which seems to correlate with the use of 
G2-targeting vaccines. The evolving pattern of the G2 viruses presents 
geographic bias as they evolve tachytely in South Korea but undergo the highest 
recombination in China. Therefore, we clustered six PEDV haplotypes in China, 
whereas South Korea held five haplotypes, including a unique haplotype G. In 
addition, an assessment of the spatiotemporal spread route of PEDV indicates 
Germany and Japan as the primary hubs for PEDV dissemination in Europe and Asia, 
respectively. Overall, our findings provide novel insights into the 
epidemiology, evolution, and transmission of PEDV, and thus may lay a foundation 
for the prevention and control of PEDV and other coronaviruses.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad052
PMCID: PMC10027654
PMID: 36869744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad049. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad049.

Recombination Variation Shapes Phylogeny and Introgression in Wild Diploid 
Strawberries.

Feng C(1)(2), Wang J(3), Liston A(4), Kang M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources Conservation and Sustainable Utilization, 
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Botany, South China Botanical 
Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Institute of Pomology, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Jiangsu Key 
Laboratory for Horticultural Crop Genetic Improvement, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR.

Introgressive hybridization is widespread in wild plants and has important 
consequences. However, frequent hybridization between species makes the 
estimation of the species' phylogeny challenging, and little is known about the 
genomic landscape of introgression as it results from complex interactions of 
multiple evolutionary processes. Here, we reconstructed the phylogeny of ten 
wild diploid strawberries with whole genome resequencing data and then 
investigated the influence of recombination rate variation on phylogeny and 
introgression. We found that genomic regions with low recombination showed 
reduced levels of incomplete lineage sorting and introgression, and concentrated 
phylogenetic signals, thus contributing to the most likely species tree of wild 
diploid strawberries. We revealed complex and widespread introgression across 
the genus Fragaria, with an average proportion of approximately 4.1% of the 
extant genome. Introgression tends to be retained in the regions with high 
recombination rates and low gene density. Furthermore, we identified four SLF 
genes under selective sweeps that may play potential roles in the possible 
regain of self-incompatibility by ancient introgression. Altogether, our study 
yielded novel insights into the evolutionary history and genomic characteristics 
of introgression in wild diploid strawberries and provides evidence for the role 
of introgression in plant mating system transitions.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad049
PMCID: PMC10015625
PMID: 36864629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest statement. The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


334. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad035. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad035.

MitoFish, MitoAnnotator, and MiFish Pipeline: Updates in 10 Years.

Zhu T(1), Sato Y(2), Sado T(3), Miya M(3), Iwasaki W(1)(4)(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(2)Research Laboratory Center, Faculty of Medicine, The University of the 
Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Collection Management, Natural History Museum and Institute, 
Chiba, Chiba, Japan.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of 
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.
(6)Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, 
Chiba, Japan.
(7)Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Collaborative Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, The University 
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

MitoFish, MitoAnnotator, and MiFish Pipeline are comprehensive databases of fish 
mitochondrial genomes (mitogenomes), accurate annotation software of fish 
mitogenomes, and a web platform for metabarcoding analysis of fish mitochondrial 
environmental DNA (eDNA), respectively. The MitoFish Suite currently receives 
over 48,000 visits worldwide every year; however, the performance and usefulness 
of the online platforms can still be improved. Here, we present essential 
updates on these platforms, including an enrichment of the reference data sets, 
an enhanced searching function, substantially faster genome annotation and eDNA 
analysis with the denoising of sequencing errors, and a multisample comparative 
analysis function. These updates have made our platform more intuitive, 
effective, and reliable. These updated platforms are freely available at 
http://mitofish.aori.u-tokyo.ac.jp/.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad035
PMCID: PMC9989731
PMID: 36857197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad042. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad042.

Evolution is not Uniform Along Coding Sequences.

Bricout R(1), Weil D(2), Stroebel D(1), Genovesio A(1), Roest Crollius H(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de biologie, École normale supérieure, Institut de Biologie de 
l'ENS (IBENS), CNRS, INSERM, Paris, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Institut 
de Biologie Paris-Seine (IBPS), Paris, France.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 May 2;40(5):

Amino acids evolve at different speeds within protein sequences, because their 
functional and structural roles are different. Notably, amino acids located at 
the surface of proteins are known to evolve more rapidly than those in the core. 
In particular, amino acids at the N- and C-termini of protein sequences are 
likely to be more exposed than those at the core of the folded protein due to 
their location in the peptidic chain, and they are known to be less structured. 
Because of these reasons, we would expect that amino acids located at protein 
termini would evolve faster than residues located inside the chain. Here we test 
this hypothesis and found that amino acids evolve almost twice as fast at 
protein termini compared with those in the center, hinting at a strong 
topological bias along the sequence length. We further show that the 
distribution of solvent-accessible residues and functional domains in proteins 
readily explain how structural and functional constraints are weaker at their 
termini, leading to the observed excess of amino acid substitutions. Finally, we 
show that the specific evolutionary rates at protein termini may have direct 
consequences, notably misleading in silico methods used to infer sites under 
positive selection within genes. These results suggest that accounting for 
positional information should improve evolutionary models.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad042
PMCID: PMC10025431
PMID: 36857092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. No conflict of 
interest from any of the authors.


336. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad047. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad047.

Fitness and Functional Landscapes of the E. coli RNase III Gene rnc.

Weeks R(1), Ostermeier M(2).

Author information:
(1)Chemistry-Biology Interface Graduate Program, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

How protein properties such as protein activity and protein essentiality affect 
the distribution of fitness effects (DFE) of mutations are important questions 
in protein evolution. Deep mutational scanning studies typically measure the 
effects of a comprehensive set of mutations on either protein activity or 
fitness. Our understanding of the underpinnings of the DFE would be enhanced by 
a comprehensive study of both for the same gene. Here, we compared the fitness 
effects and in vivo protein activity effects of ∼4,500 missense mutations in the 
E. coli rnc gene. This gene encodes RNase III, a global regulator enzyme that 
cleaves diverse RNA substrates including precursor ribosomal RNA and various 
mRNAs including its own 5' untranslated region (5'UTR). We find that RNase III's 
ability to cleave dsRNA is the most important determinant of the fitness effects 
of rnc mutations. The DFE of RNase III was bimodal, with mutations centered 
around neutral and deleterious effects, consistent with previously reported 
DFE's of enzymes with a singular physiological role. Fitness was buffered to 
small effects on RNase III activity. The enzyme's RNase III domain, which 
contains the RNase III signature motif and all active site residues, was more 
sensitive to mutation than its dsRNA binding domain, which is responsible for 
recognition and binding to dsRNA. Differential effects on fitness and functional 
scores for mutations at highly conserved residues G97, G99, and F188 suggest 
that these positions may be important for RNase III cleavage specificity.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad047
PMCID: PMC10037077
PMID: 36848192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad046. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad046.

Contrasting Patterns of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms and Structural Variation 
Across Multiple Invasions.

Stuart KC(1)(2), Edwards RJ(3), Sherwin WB(1), Rollins LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Evolution & Ecology Research Centre, School of Biological, Earth and 
Environmental Sciences, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Evolution & Ecology Research Centre, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular 
Sciences, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Genetic divergence is the fundamental process that drives evolution and 
ultimately speciation. Structural variants (SVs) are large-scale genomic 
differences within a species or population and can cause functionally important 
phenotypic differences. Characterizing SVs across invasive species will fill 
knowledge gaps regarding how patterns of genetic diversity and genetic 
architecture shape rapid adaptation under new selection regimes. Here, we seek 
to understand patterns in genetic diversity within the globally invasive 
European starling, Sturnus vulgaris. Using whole genome sequencing of eight 
native United Kingdom (UK), eight invasive North America (NA), and 33 invasive 
Australian (AU) starlings, we examine patterns in genome-wide SNPs and SVs 
between populations and within Australia. Our findings detail the landscape of 
standing genetic variation across recently diverged continental populations of 
this invasive avian. We demonstrate that patterns of genetic diversity estimated 
from SVs do not necessarily reflect relative patterns from SNP data, either when 
considering patterns of diversity along the length of the organism's chromosomes 
(owing to enrichment of SVs in subtelomeric repeat regions), or interpopulation 
diversity patterns (possibly a result of altered selection regimes or 
introduction history). Finally, we find that levels of balancing selection 
within the native range differ across SNP and SV of different classes and 
outlier classifications. Overall, our results demonstrate that the processes 
that shape allelic diversity within populations is complex and support the need 
for further investigation of SVs across a range of taxa to better understand 
correlations between often well-studied SNP diversity and that of SVs.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad046
PMCID: PMC10037079
PMID: 36814414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad044. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad044.

The Interplay Between Developmental Stage and Environment Underlies the Adaptive 
Effect of a Natural Transposable Element Insertion.

Merenciano M(1), González J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra), Barcelona, 
Spain.

Establishing causal links between adaptive mutations and ecologically relevant 
phenotypes is key to understanding the process of adaptation, which is a central 
goal in evolutionary biology with applications for conservation, medicine, and 
agriculture. Yet despite recent progress, the number of identified causal 
adaptive mutations remains limited. Linking genetic variation to fitness-related 
effects is complicated by gene-by-gene and gene-by-environment interactions, 
among other processes. Transposable elements, which are often ignored in the 
quest for the genetic basis of adaptive evolution, are a genome-wide source of 
regulatory elements across organisms that can potentially result in adaptive 
phenotypes. In this work, we combine gene expression, in vivo reporter assays, 
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing, and survival experiments to characterize in detail 
the molecular and phenotypic consequences of a natural Drosophila melanogaster 
transposable element insertion: the roo solo-LTR FBti0019985. This transposable 
element provides an alternative promoter to the transcription factor Lime, 
involved in cold- and immune-stress responses. We found that the effect of 
FBti0019985 on Lime expression depends on the interplay between the 
developmental stage and environmental condition. We further establish a causal 
link between the presence of FBti0019985 and increased survival to cold- and 
immune-stress. Our results exemplify how several developmental stages and 
environmental conditions need to be considered to characterize the molecular and 
functional effects of a genetic variant, and add to the growing body of evidence 
that transposable elements can induce complex mutations with ecologically 
relevant effects.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad044
PMCID: PMC10015617
PMID: 36811953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad045. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad045.

Speciation Underpinned by Unexpected Molecular Diversity in the Mycorrhizal 
Fungal Genus Pisolithus.

Plett JM(1), Miyauchi S(2)(3)(4), Morin E(2), Plett K(1)(5), Wong-Bajracharya 
J(1)(5), de Freitas Pereira M(2), Kuo A(6), Henrissat B(7)(8), Drula E(9)(10), 
Wojtalewicz D(1), Riley R(6), Pangilinan J(6), Andreopoulos W(6), LaButti K(6), 
Daum C(6), Yoshinaga Y(6), Fauchery L(2), Ng V(6), Lipzen A(6), Barry K(6), 
Singan V(6), Guo J(6), Lebel T(11), Costa MD(12)(13), Grigoriev IV(6)(14), 
Martin F(2), Anderson IC(1), Kohler A(2).

Author information:
(1)Hawkesbury Institute for the Environment, Western Sydney University, 
Richmond, Australia.
(2)Université de Lorraine, INRAE, Interactions Arbres/Microorganismes, 
Champenoux, France.
(3)Department of Plant-Microbe Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Plant 
Breeding Research, Köln, Germany.
(4)Evolution and Synthetic Biology Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and 
Technology Graduate University, Onna, Japan.
(5)Elizabeth Macarthur Agricultural Institute, NSW Department of Primary 
Industries, Menangle, Australia.
(6)US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.
(8)DTU Bioengineering, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(9)Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques (AFMB), CNRS, Aix 
Marseille Université, Marseille, France.
(10)INRAE, USC1408 Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques 
(AFMB), Marseille, France.
(11)Botanic Gardens and State Herbarium, Department for Environment and Water, 
Adelaide, Australia.
(12)Department of Microbiology, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, Brazil.
(13)Laboratório de Associações Micorrízicas, Instituto de Biotecnologia Aplicada 
à Agropecuária (BIOAGRO), Av. P. H. Rolfs, s/n, Campus UFV. Bolsista Pesquisador 
do Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq), 
Brasília, DF, Brazil, Viçosa, Brazil.
(14)Plant and Microbial Biology Department, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.

The mutualistic ectomycorrhizal (ECM) fungal genus Pisolithus comprises 19 
species defined to date which colonize the roots of >50 hosts worldwide 
suggesting that substantial genomic and functional evolution occurred during 
speciation. To better understand this intra-genus variation, we undertook a 
comparative multi-omic study of nine Pisolithus species sampled from North 
America, South America, Asia, and Australasia. We found that there was a small 
core set of genes common to all species (13%), and that these genes were more 
likely to be significantly regulated during symbiosis with a host than accessory 
or species-specific genes. Thus, the genetic "toolbox" foundational to the 
symbiotic lifestyle in this genus is small. Transposable elements were located 
significantly closer to gene classes including effector-like small secreted 
proteins (SSPs). Poorly conserved SSPs were more likely to be induced by 
symbiosis, suggesting that they may be a class of protein that tune host 
specificity. The Pisolithus gene repertoire is characterized by divergent CAZyme 
profiles when compared with other fungi, both symbiotic and saprotrophic. This 
was driven by differences in enzymes associated with symbiotic sugar processing, 
although metabolomic analysis suggest that neither copy number nor expression of 
these genes is sufficient to predict sugar capture from a host plant or its 
metabolism in fungal hyphae. Our results demonstrate that intra-genus genomic 
and functional diversity within ECM fungi is greater than previously thought, 
underlining the importance of continued comparative studies within the fungal 
tree of life to refine our focus on pathways and evolutionary processes 
foundational to this symbiotic lifestyle.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad045
PMCID: PMC10066745
PMID: 36811946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad043. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad043.

Chromosome Fissions and Fusions Act as Barriers to Gene Flow between Brenthis 
Fritillary Butterflies.

Mackintosh A(1), Vila R(2), Laetsch DR(1), Hayward A(3), Martin SH(1), Lohse 
K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 
3FL, United Kingdom.
(2)Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra), Passeig 
Marítim de la Barceloneta 37, ESP-08003 Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, 
Cornwall TR10 9FE, United Kingdom.

Chromosome rearrangements are thought to promote reproductive isolation between 
incipient species. However, it is unclear how often, and under what conditions, 
fission and fusion rearrangements act as barriers to gene flow. Here we 
investigate speciation between two largely sympatric fritillary butterflies, 
Brenthis daphne and Brenthis ino. We use a composite likelihood approach to 
infer the demographic history of these species from whole-genome sequence data. 
We then compare chromosome-level genome assemblies of individuals from each 
species and identify a total of nine chromosome fissions and fusions. Finally, 
we fit a demographic model where effective population sizes and effective 
migration rate vary across the genome, allowing us to quantify the effects of 
chromosome rearrangements on reproductive isolation. We show that chromosomes 
involved in rearrangements experienced less effective migration since the onset 
of species divergence and that genomic regions near rearrangement points have a 
further reduction in effective migration rate. Our results suggest that the 
evolution of multiple rearrangements in the B. daphne and B. ino populations, 
including alternative fusions of the same chromosomes, have resulted in a 
reduction in gene flow. Although fission and fusion of chromosomes are unlikely 
to be the only processes that have led to speciation between these butterflies, 
this study shows that these rearrangements can directly promote reproductive 
isolation and may be involved in speciation when karyotypes evolve quickly.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad043
PMCID: PMC10015618
PMID: 36810615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest. The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.


341. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad039. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad039.

Genome Size Changes by Duplication, Divergence, and Insertion in Caenorhabditis 
Worms.

Adams PE(1)(2), Eggers VK(3), Millwood JD(1), Sutton JM(1)(4), Pienaar J(3)(5), 
Fierst JL(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, 
USA.
(2)Current address: Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, 
Auburn, AL, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, 
FL, USA.
(4)Current address: Absci, Vancouver, WA, USA.
(5)Institute of the Environment, Miami, FL, USA.
(6)Biomolecular Sciences Institute, Miami, FL, USA.

Genome size has been measurable since the 1940s but we still do not understand 
genome size variation. Caenorhabditis nematodes show strong conservation of 
chromosome number but vary in genome size between closely related species. 
Androdioecy, where populations are composed of males and self-fertile 
hermaphrodites, evolved from outcrossing, female-male dioecy, three times in 
this group. In Caenorhabditis, androdioecious genomes are 10-30% smaller than 
dioecious species, but in the nematode Pristionchus, androdioecy evolved six 
times and does not correlate with genome size. Previous hypotheses include 
genome size evolution through: 1) Deletions and "genome shrinkage" in 
androdioecious species; 2) Transposable element (TE) expansion and DNA loss 
through large deletions (the "accordion model"); and 3) Differing TE dynamics in 
androdioecious and dioecious species. We analyzed nematode genomes and found no 
evidence for these hypotheses. Instead, nematode genome sizes had strong 
phylogenetic inertia with increases in a few dioecious species, contradicting 
the "genome shrinkage" hypothesis. TEs did not explain genome size variation 
with the exception of the DNA transposon Mutator which was twice as abundant in 
dioecious genomes. Across short and long evolutionary distances Caenorhabditis 
genomes evolved through small structural mutations including gene-associated 
duplications and insertions. Seventy-one protein families had significant, 
parallel decreases across androdioecious Caenorhabditis including genes involved 
in the sensory system, regulatory proteins and membrane-associated immune 
responses. Our results suggest that within a dynamic landscape of frequent small 
rearrangements in Caenorhabditis, reproductive mode mediates genome evolution by 
altering the precise fates of individual genes, proteins, and the phenotypes 
they underlie.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad039
PMCID: PMC10015627
PMID: 36807460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad029. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad029.

Genomics of Secondarily Temperate Adaptation in the Only Non-Antarctic Icefish.

Rivera-Colón AG(1), Rayamajhi N(1), Minhas BF(2), Madrigal G(1), Bilyk KT(3), 
Yoon V(1), Hüne M(4), Gregory S(5)(6), Cheng CHC(1), Catchen JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Behavior, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL.
(2)Informatics Program, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL.
(3)Department of Biology, Montclair State University, Montclair, NJ.
(4)Centro de Investigación para la Conservación de los Ecosistemas Australes, 
Punta Arenas, Chile.
(5)British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Government of South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Stanley, 
Falklands.

White-blooded Antarctic icefishes, a family within the adaptive radiation of 
Antarctic notothenioid fishes, are an example of extreme biological 
specialization to both the chronic cold of the Southern Ocean and life without 
hemoglobin. As a result, icefishes display derived physiology that limits them 
to the cold and highly oxygenated Antarctic waters. Against these constraints, 
remarkably one species, the pike icefish Champsocephalus esox, successfully 
colonized temperate South American waters. To study the genetic mechanisms 
underlying secondarily temperate adaptation in icefishes, we generated 
chromosome-level genome assemblies of both C. esox and its Antarctic sister 
species, Champsocephalus gunnari. The C. esox genome is similar in structure and 
organization to that of its Antarctic congener; however, we observe evidence of 
chromosomal rearrangements coinciding with regions of elevated genetic 
divergence in pike icefish populations. We also find several key biological 
pathways under selection, including genes related to mitochondria and vision, 
highlighting candidates behind temperate adaptation in C. esox. Substantial 
antifreeze glycoprotein (AFGP) pseudogenization has occurred in the pike 
icefish, likely due to relaxed selection following ancestral escape from 
Antarctica. The canonical AFGP locus organization is conserved in C. esox and C. 
gunnari, but both show a translocation of two AFGP copies to a separate locus, 
previously unobserved in cryonotothenioids. Altogether, the study of this 
secondarily temperate species provides an insight into the mechanisms underlying 
adaptation to ecologically disparate environments in this otherwise highly 
specialized group.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad029
PMCID: PMC9985337
PMID: 36806940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad040. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad040.

Multi-omics Investigation of Freeze Tolerance in the Amur Sleeper, an Aquatic 
Ectothermic Vertebrate.

Jiang H(1)(2), Lv W(1)(3), Wang Y(4)(5), Qian Y(1)(3), Wang C(1)(3), Sun 
N(1)(3), Fang C(1), Irwin DM(6)(7), Gan X(1), He S(1)(4)(8), Yang L(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Key Laboratory of Aquatic Biodiversity and Conservation of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Wuhan, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Academy of Plateau Science and Sustainability, Qinghai Normal University, 
Xining, China.
(5)Hubei Engineering Research Center for Protection and Utilization of Special 
Biological Resources in the Hanjiang River Basin, School of Life Sciences, 
Jianghan University, Wuhan, China.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(7)Banting and Best Diabetes Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(8)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Freeze tolerance, the ability of an organism to survive internal ice formation, 
is a striking survival strategy employed by some ectotherms living in cold 
environments. However, the genetic bases of this remarkable adaptation are 
largely unknown. The Amur sleeper (Perccottus glenii), the only known 
freeze-tolerant fish species, can overwinter with its entire body frozen in ice. 
Here, we sequenced the chromosome-level genome of the Amur sleeper and performed 
comparative genomic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic analyses to investigate its 
strategies for surviving freezing. Evolutionary analysis suggested that the Amur 
sleeper diverged from its closest non-cold-hardy relative about 15.07 million 
years ago and has experienced a high rate of protein evolution. Transcriptomic 
and metabolomic data identified a coordinated and tissue-specific regulation of 
genes and metabolites involved in hypometabolism, cellular stress response, and 
cryoprotectant accumulation involved in freezing and thawing. Several genes show 
evidence of accelerated protein sequence evolution or family size expansion were 
found as adaptive responses to freezing-induced stresses. Specifically, genetic 
changes associated with cytoskeleton stability, cryoprotectant synthesis, 
transmembrane transport, and neuroprotective adaptations were identified as 
potentially key innovations that aid in freezing survival. Our work provides 
valuable resources and opportunities to unveil the molecular adaptations 
supporting freeze tolerance in ectothermic vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad040
PMCID: PMC10036996
PMID: 36805964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad034. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad034.

Evolution of Spatial and Temporal cis-Regulatory Divergence in Sticklebacks.

Mack KL(1), Square TA(2), Zhao B(1), Miller CT(2), Fraser HB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA.

Cis-regulatory changes are thought to play a major role in adaptation. 
Threespine sticklebacks have repeatedly colonized freshwater habitats in the 
Northern Hemisphere, where they have evolved a suite of phenotypes that 
distinguish them from marine populations, including changes in physiology, 
behavior, and morphology. To understand the role of gene regulatory evolution in 
adaptive divergence, here we investigate cis-regulatory changes in gene 
expression between marine and freshwater ecotypes through allele-specific 
expression (ASE) in F1 hybrids. Surveying seven ecologically relevant tissues, 
including three sampled across two developmental stages, we identified 
cis-regulatory divergence affecting a third of genes, nearly half of which were 
tissue-specific. Next, we compared allele-specific expression in dental tissues 
at two timepoints to characterize cis-regulatory changes during development 
between marine and freshwater fish. Applying a genome-wide test for selection on 
cis-regulatory changes, we find evidence for lineage-specific selection on 
several processes between ecotypes, including the Wnt signaling pathway in 
dental tissues. Finally, we show that genes with ASE, particularly those that 
are tissue-specific, are strongly enriched in genomic regions of repeated 
marine-freshwater divergence, supporting an important role for these 
cis-regulatory differences in parallel adaptive evolution of sticklebacks to 
freshwater habitats. Altogether, our results provide insight into the 
cis-regulatory landscape of divergence between stickleback ecotypes across 
tissues and during development, and support a fundamental role for 
tissue-specific cis-regulatory changes in rapid adaptation to new environments.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad034
PMCID: PMC10015619
PMID: 36805962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad038. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad038.

Genes Vary Greatly in Their Propensity for Collateral Fitness Effects of 
Mutations.

Mehlhoff JD(1), Ostermeier M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD.

Mutations can have deleterious fitness effects when they decrease protein 
specific activity or decrease active protein abundance. Mutations will also be 
deleterious when they cause misfolding or misinteractions that are toxic to the 
cell (i.e., independent of whether the mutations affect specific activity and 
abundance). The extent to which protein evolution is shaped by these and other 
collateral fitness effects is unclear in part because little is known of their 
frequency and magnitude. Using deep mutational scanning (DMS), we previously 
found at least 42% of missense mutations in the TEM-1 β-lactamase antibiotic 
resistance gene cause deleterious collateral fitness effects. Here, we used DMS 
to comprehensively determine the collateral fitness effects of missense 
mutations in three genes encoding the antibiotic resistance proteins New Delhi 
metallo-β-lactamase (NDM-1), chloramphenicol acetyltransferase I (CAT-I), and 
2″-aminoglycoside nucleotidyltransferase (AadB). AadB (20%), CAT-I (0.9%), and 
NDM-1 (0.2%) were less susceptible to deleterious collateral fitness effects 
than TEM-1 (42%) indicating that genes have different propensities for these 
effects. As was observed with TEM-1, all the studied deleterious aadB mutants 
increased aggregation. However, aggregation did not correlate with collateral 
fitness effects for many of the deleterious mutants of CAT-I and NDM-1. Select 
deleterious mutants caused unexpected phenotypes to emerge. The introduction of 
internal start codons in CAT-1 caused loss of the episome and a mutation in aadB 
made its cognate antibiotic essential for growth. Our study illustrates how the 
complexity of the cell provides a rich environment for collateral fitness 
effects and new phenotypes to emerge.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad038
PMCID: PMC9999109
PMID: 36798991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad037. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad037.

Dual Functions of labial Resolve the Hox Logic of Chelicerate Head Segments.

Gainett G(1), Klementz BC(1), Blaszczyk PO(1), Bruce HS(2), Patel NH(2)(3), 
Sharma PP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI.
(2)Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA.
(3)Organismal Biology & Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Despite an abundance of gene expression surveys, comparatively little is known 
about Hox gene function in Chelicerata. Previous investigations of paralogs of 
labial (lab) and Deformed (Dfd) in a spider have shown that these play a role in 
tissue maintenance of the pedipalp segment (lab-1) and in patterning the first 
walking leg identity (Dfd-1), respectively. However, extrapolations of these 
data across chelicerates are hindered by the existence of duplicated Hox genes 
in arachnopulmonates (e.g., spiders and scorpions), which have resulted from an 
ancient whole genome duplication (WGD) event. Here, we investigated the function 
of the single-copy ortholog of lab in the harvestman Phalangium opilio, an 
exemplar of a lineage that was not subject to this WGD. Embryonic RNA 
interference against lab resulted in two classes of phenotypes: homeotic 
transformations of pedipalps to chelicerae, as well as reduction and fusion of 
the pedipalp and leg 1 segments. To test for combinatorial function, we 
performed a double knockdown of lab and Dfd, which resulted in a homeotic 
transformation of both pedipalps and the first walking legs into cheliceral 
identity, whereas the second walking leg is transformed into a pedipalpal 
identity. Taken together, these results elucidate a model for the Hox logic of 
head segments in Chelicerata. To substantiate the validity of this model, we 
performed expression surveys for lab and Dfd paralogs in scorpions and horseshoe 
crabs. We show that repetition of morphologically similar appendages is 
correlated with uniform expression levels of the Hox genes lab and Dfd, 
irrespective of the number of gene copies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad037
PMCID: PMC10015621
PMID: 36798978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad036. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad036.

Putative Signals of Generalist Plant Species Adaptation to Local Pollinator 
Communities and Abiotic Factors.

Frachon L(1), Arrigo L(1), Rusman Q(1), Poveda L(2), Qi W(2)(3), Scopece 
G(4)(5), Schiestl FP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systematic and Evolutionary Botany, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Functional Genomics Center Zurich, ETH Zurich/University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1202 Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Naples Federico II, Complesso 
Universitario MSA, Naples, Italy.
(5)NBFC: National Biodiversity Future Center, Palermo 90133, Italy.

The reproductive success of flowering plants with generalized pollination 
systems is influenced by interactions with a diverse pollinator community and 
abiotic factors. However, knowledge about the adaptative potential of plants to 
complex ecological networks and the underlying genetic mechanisms is still 
limited. Based on a pool-sequencing approach of 21 natural populations of 
Brassica incana in Southern Italy, we combined a genome-environmental 
association analysis with a genome scan for signals of population genomic 
differentiation to discover genetic variants associated with the ecological 
variation. We identified genomic regions putatively involved in the adaptation 
of B. incana to the identity of local pollinator functional categories and 
pollinator community composition. Interestingly, we observed several shared 
candidate genes associated with long-tongue bees, soil texture, and temperature 
variation. We established a genomic map of potential generalist flowering plant 
local adaptation to complex biotic interactions, and the importance of 
considering multiple environmental factors to describe the adaptive landscape of 
plant populations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad036
PMCID: PMC10015620
PMID: 36795638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad033. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad033.

Bioinformatics Analysis of Mutations Sheds Light on the Evolution of Dengue NS1 
Protein With Implications in the Identification of Potential Functional and 
Druggable Sites.

Sharma A(1), Krishna S(1)(2), Sowdhamini R(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Biological Science, TIFR, Bangalore, India.
(2)Department of School of Interdisciplinary Life Sciences, Indian Institute of 
Technology Goa, Farmagudi, Pond-403401, Goa, India.
(3)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.
(4)Computational Biology, Institute of Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology, 
Bangalore, India.

Non-structural protein (NS1) is a 350 amino acid long conserved protein in the 
dengue virus. Conservation of NS1 is expected due to its importance in dengue 
pathogenesis. The protein is known to exist in dimeric and hexameric states. The 
dimeric state is involved in its interaction with host proteins and viral 
replication, and the hexameric state is involved in viral invasion. In this 
work, we performed extensive structure and sequence analysis of NS1 protein, and 
uncovered the role of NS1 quaternary states in its evolution. A 
three-dimensional modeling of unresolved loop regions in NS1 structure is 
performed. "Conserved" and "Variable" regions within NS1 protein were identified 
from sequences obtained from patient samples and the role of compensatory 
mutations in selecting destabilizing mutations were identified. Molecular 
dynamics (MD) simulations were performed to extensively study the effect of a 
few mutations on NS1 structure stability and compensatory mutations. Virtual 
saturation mutagenesis, predicting the effect of every individual amino acid 
substitution on NS1 stability sequentially, revealed virtual-conserved and 
variable sites. The increase in number of observed and virtual-conserved regions 
across NS1 quaternary states suggest the role of higher order structure 
formation in its evolutionary conservation. Our sequence and structure analysis 
could enable in identifying possible protein-protein interfaces and druggable 
sites. Virtual screening of nearly 10,000 small molecules, including 
FDA-approved drugs, permitted us to recognize six drug-like molecules targeting 
the dimeric sites. These molecules could be promising due to their stable 
interactions with NS1 throughout the simulation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad033
PMCID: PMC9989740
PMID: 36795614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad027. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad027.

HaploBlocks: Efficient Detection of Positive Selection in Large Population 
Genomic Datasets.

Kirsch-Gerweck B(1), Bohnenkämper L(2), Henrichs MT(2), Alanko JN(3), Bannai 
H(4), Cazaux B(5), Peterlongo P(6), Burger J(1), Stoye J(2), Diekmann Y(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Palaeogenetics Group, Institute of Organismic and Molecular Evolution (iomE), 
Johannes Gutenberg University, 55128 Mainz, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Technology and Center for Biotechnology (CeBiTec), Bielefeld 
University, Universitätsstr. 25, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, P.O 68, Pietari 
Kalmin katu 5, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.
(4)M&D Data Science Center, Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), 2-3-10 
Kanda-Surugadai, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.
(5)CNRS, Centrale Lille, UMR 9189, Univ. Lille, CRIStAL, F-59000 Lille, France.
(6)GenScale, Inria/Irisa Campus de Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France.
(7)Research Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University 
College London, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.

Genomic regions under positive selection harbor variation linked for example to 
adaptation. Most tools for detecting positively selected variants have 
computational resource requirements rendering them impractical on population 
genomic datasets with hundreds of thousands of individuals or more. We have 
developed and implemented an efficient haplotype-based approach able to scan 
large datasets and accurately detect positive selection. We achieve this by 
combining a pattern matching approach based on the positional Burrows-Wheeler 
transform with model-based inference which only requires the evaluation of 
closed-form expressions. We evaluate our approach with simulations, and find it 
to be both sensitive and specific. The computational resource requirements 
quantified using UK Biobank data indicate that our implementation is scalable to 
population genomic datasets with millions of individuals. Our approach may serve 
as an algorithmic blueprint for the era of "big data" genomics: a combinatorial 
core coupled with statistical inference in closed form.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad027
PMCID: PMC9985328
PMID: 36790822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad028. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad028.

Horizontal Gene Transfer, Fitness Costs and Mobility Shape the Spread of 
Antibiotic Resistance Genes into Experimental Populations of Acinetobacter 
Baylyi.

Sezmis AL(1), Woods LC(1), Peleg AY(2)(3)(4), McDonald MJ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Alfred Hospital and Central Clinical 
School, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Infection Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Department of 
Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Centre to Impact AMR, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is important for microbial evolution, but how 
evolutionary forces shape the frequencies of horizontally transferred genetic 
variants in the absence of strong selection remains an open question. In this 
study, we evolve laboratory populations of Acinetobacter baylyi (ADP1) with HGT 
from two clinically relevant strains of multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter 
baumannii (AB5075 and A9844). We find that DNA can cross the species barrier, 
even without strong selection, and despite substantial DNA sequence divergence 
between the two species. Our results confirm previous findings that HGT can 
drive the spread of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) without selection for 
that antibiotic, but not for all of the resistance genes present in the donor 
genome. We quantify the costs and benefits of horizontally transferred variants 
and use whole population sequencing to track the spread of ARGs from HGT donors 
into antibiotic-sensitive recipients. We find that even though most ARGs are 
taken up by populations of A. baylyi, the long-term fate of an individual gene 
depends both on its fitness cost and on the type of genetic element that carries 
the gene. Interestingly, we also found that an integron, but not its host 
plasmid, is able to spread in A. baylyi populations despite its strong 
deleterious effect. Altogether, our results show how HGT provides an 
evolutionary advantage to evolving populations by facilitating the spread of 
non-selected genetic variation including costly ARGs.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad028
PMCID: PMC9985319
PMID: 36788632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad032. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad032.

Cell Survival Enabled by Leakage of a Labile Metabolic Intermediate.

Medina-Carmona E(1)(2), Gutierrez-Rus LI(1), Manssour-Triedo F(1), Newton 
MS(3)(4), Gamiz-Arco G(1), Mota AJ(5), Reiné P(6), Cuerva JM(6), Ortega-Muñoz 
M(6), Andrés-León E(7), Ortega-Roldan JL(2), Seelig B(3)(4), Ibarra-Molero B(1), 
Sanchez-Ruiz JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Quimica Fisica, Facultad de Ciencias, Unidad de Excelencia de 
Quimica Aplicada a Biomedicina y Medioambiente (UEQ), Universidad de Granada, 
Granada, Spain.
(2)School of Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN.
(4)BioTechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, St Paul, MN.
(5)Departamento de Quimica Inorganica, Facultad de Ciencias, Unidad de 
Excelencia de Quimica Aplicada a Biomedicina y Medioambiente (UEQ), Universidad 
de Granada, Granada, Spain.
(6)Departamento de Quimica Organica, Facultad de Ciencias, Unidad de Excelencia 
de Quimica Aplicada a Biomedicina y Medioambiente (UEQ), Universidad de Granada, 
Granada, Spain.
(7)Unidad de Bioinformática, Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina "Lopez 
Neyra", CSIC, Armilla, Granada, Spain.

Many metabolites are generated in one step of a biochemical pathway and consumed 
in a subsequent step. Such metabolic intermediates are often reactive molecules 
which, if allowed to freely diffuse in the intracellular milieu, could lead to 
undesirable side reactions and even become toxic to the cell. Therefore, 
metabolic intermediates are often protected as protein-bound species and 
directly transferred between enzyme active sites in multi-functional enzymes, 
multi-enzyme complexes, and metabolons. Sequestration of reactive metabolic 
intermediates thus contributes to metabolic efficiency. It is not known, 
however, whether this evolutionary adaptation can be relaxed in response to 
challenges to organismal survival. Here, we report evolutionary repair 
experiments on Escherichia coli cells in which an enzyme crucial for the 
biosynthesis of proline has been deleted. The deletion makes cells unable to 
grow in a culture medium lacking proline. Remarkably, however, cell growth is 
efficiently restored by many single mutations (12 at least) in the gene of 
glutamine synthetase. The mutations cause the leakage to the intracellular 
milieu of a highly reactive phosphorylated intermediate common to the 
biosynthetic pathways of glutamine and proline. This intermediate is generally 
assumed to exist only as a protein-bound species. Nevertheless, its diffusion 
upon mutation-induced leakage enables a new route to proline biosynthesis. Our 
results support that leakage of sequestered metabolic intermediates can readily 
occur and contribute to organismal adaptation in some scenarios. Enhanced 
availability of reactive molecules may enable the generation of new biochemical 
pathways and the potential of mutation-induced leakage in metabolic engineering 
is noted.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad032
PMCID: PMC9989741
PMID: 36788592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad031. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad031.

Genomic Basis of Adaptation to a Novel Precipitation Regime.

Elfarargi AF(1), Gilbault E(2), Döring N(1), Neto C(1), Fulgione A(1), Weber 
APM(3), Loudet O(2), Hancock AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Basis for Adaptation Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Plant 
Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, Institut Jean-Pierre Bourgin 
(IJPB), Versailles, France.
(3)Institute of Plant Biochemistry, Cluster of Excellence on Plant Science 
(CEPLAS), Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Energy production and metabolism are intimately linked to ecological and 
environmental constraints across the tree of life. In plants, which depend on 
sunlight to produce energy, the link between primary metabolism and the 
environment is especially strong. By governing CO2 uptake for photosynthesis and 
transpiration, leaf pores, or stomata, couple energy metabolism to the 
environment and determine productivity and water-use efficiency (WUE). Although 
evolution is known to tune physiological traits to the local environment, we 
lack knowledge of the specific links between molecular and evolutionary 
mechanisms that shape this process in nature. Here, we investigate the evolution 
of stomatal conductance and WUE in an Arabidopsis population that colonized an 
island with a montane cloud scrubland ecosystem characterized by seasonal 
drought and fog-based precipitation. We find that stomatal conductance increases 
and WUE decreases in the colonizing population relative to its closest outgroup 
population from temperate North Africa. Genome-wide association mapping reveals 
a polygenic basis of trait variation, with a substantial contribution from a 
nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphism in MAP KINASE 12 (MPK12 G53R), 
which explains 35% of the phenotypic variance in WUE in the island population. 
We reconstruct the spatially explicit evolutionary history of MPK12 53R on the 
island and find that this allele increased in frequency in the population due to 
positive selection as Arabidopsis expanded into the harsher regions of the 
island. Overall, these findings show how adaptation shaped quantitative 
eco-physiological traits in a new precipitation regime defined by low rainfall 
and high humidity.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad031
PMCID: PMC10037080
PMID: 36788455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):msad030. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad030.

Adaptation of Antarctic Icefish Vision to Extreme Environments.

Castiglione GM(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Hauser FE(1)(6), Van Nynatten A(2)(6), Chang 
BSW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN.
(5)Evolutionary Studies, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toronto Scarborough, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad058.

Extreme environments, such as Antarctic habitats, present major challenges for 
many biological processes. Antarctic icefishes (Crynotothenioidea) represent a 
compelling system to investigate the molecular basis of adaptation to cold 
temperatures. Here, we explore how the sub-zero habitats of Antarctic icefishes 
have impacted rhodopsin (RH1) function, the temperature-sensitive dim-light 
visual pigment found in rod photoreceptors. Using likelihood models and 
ancestral reconstruction, we find that accelerated evolutionary rates in icefish 
RH1 underlie unique amino acid mutations absent from other deep-dwelling fishes, 
introduced before (S160A) and during (V259M) the onset of modern polar 
conditions. Functional assays reveal that these mutations red-shift rhodopsin 
spectral absorbance, consistent with spectral irradiance under sea ice. These 
mutations also lower the activation energy associated with retinal release of 
the light-activated RH1, and accelerate its return to the dark state, likely 
compensating for a cold-induced decrease in kinetic rates. These are adaptations 
in key properties of rhodopsin that mediate rod sensitivity and visual 
performance in the cold dark seas of the Antarctic.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad030
PMCID: PMC10097508
PMID: 36763103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad025. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad025.

Independent Innexin Radiation Shaped Signaling in Ctenophores.

Ortiz J(1)(2), Bobkov YV(1), DeBiasse MB(1)(3), Mitchell DG(1)(4), Edgar A(1), 
Martindale MQ(1)(4), Moss AG(5), Babonis LS(1)(6), Ryan JF(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Whitney Laboratory for Marine Bioscience, University of Florida, St 
Augustine, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)School of Natural Sciences, University of California Merced, Merced, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Biological Sciences Department, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA.
(6)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY, USA.

Innexins facilitate cell-cell communication by forming gap junctions or 
nonjunctional hemichannels, which play important roles in metabolic, chemical, 
ionic, and electrical coupling. The lack of knowledge regarding the evolution 
and role of these channels in ctenophores (comb jellies), the likely sister 
group to the rest of animals, represents a substantial gap in our understanding 
of the evolution of intercellular communication in animals. Here, we identify 
and phylogenetically characterize the complete set of innexins of four 
ctenophores: Mnemiopsis leidyi, Hormiphora californensis, Pleurobrachia bachei, 
and Beroe ovata. Our phylogenetic analyses suggest that ctenophore innexins 
diversified independently from those of other animals and were established early 
in the emergence of ctenophores. We identified a four-innexin genomic cluster, 
which was present in the last common ancestor of these four species and has been 
largely maintained in these lineages. Evidence from correlated spatial and 
temporal gene expression of the M. leidyi innexin cluster suggests that this 
cluster has been maintained due to constraints related to gene regulation. We 
describe the basic electrophysiological properties of putative ctenophore 
hemichannels from muscle cells using intracellular recording techniques, showing 
substantial overlap with the properties of bilaterian innexin channels. 
Together, our results suggest that the last common ancestor of animals had gap 
junctional channels also capable of forming functional innexin hemichannels, and 
that innexin genes have independently evolved in major lineages throughout 
Metazoa.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad025
PMCID: PMC9949713
PMID: 36740225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad024. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad024.

Strong, Recent Selective Sweeps Reshape Genetic Diversity in Freshwater Bivalve 
Megalonaias nervosa.

Rogers RL(1), Grizzard SL(2), Garner JT(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, University of North Carolina, 
Charlotte, NC 28223, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA.
(3)Division of Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries, Alabama Department of 
Conservation and Natural Resources, Florence, AL, USA.

Freshwater Unionid bivalves have recently faced ecological upheaval through 
pollution, barriers to dispersal, harvesting, and changes in fish-host 
prevalence. Currently, over 70% of species in North America are threatened, 
endangered or extinct. To characterize the genetic response to recent selective 
pressures, we collected population genetic data for one successful bivalve 
species, Megalonaias nervosa. We identify megabase-sized regions that are nearly 
monomorphic across the population, signals of strong, recent selection reshaping 
diversity across 73 Mb total. These signatures of selection are greater than is 
commonly seen in population genetic models. We observe 102 duplicate genes with 
high dN/dS on terminal branches among regions with sweeps, suggesting that gene 
duplication is a causative mechanism of recent adaptation in M. nervosa. Genes 
in sweeps reflect functional classes important for Unionid survival, including 
anticoagulation genes important for fish host parasitization, detox genes, 
mitochondria management, and shell formation. We identify sweeps in regions with 
no known functional impacts, suggesting mechanisms of adaptation that deserve 
greater attention in future work on species survival. In contrast, polymorphic 
transposable elements (TEs) appear to be detrimental and underrepresented among 
regions with sweeps. TE site frequency spectra are skewed toward singleton 
variants, and TEs among regions with sweeps are present at low frequency. Our 
work suggests that duplicate genes are an essential source of genetic novelty 
that has helped this species succeed in environments where others have 
struggled. These results suggest that gene duplications deserve greater 
attention in non-model population genomics, especially in species that have 
recently faced sudden environmental challenges.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad024
PMCID: PMC9976758
PMID: 36738170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad026. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad026.

Prevalent Introgression Underlies Convergent Evolution in the Diversification of 
Pungitius Sticklebacks.

Wang Y(1)(2), Wang Y(1), Cheng X(1)(2), Ding Y(1)(2), Wang C(1), Merilä J(3)(4), 
Guo B(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Ecological Genetics Research Unit, Research Programme in Organismal and 
Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Area of Ecology and Biodiversity, School of Biological Sciences, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(5)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(6)Academy of Plateau Science and Sustainability, Qinghai Normal University, 
Xining, China.

New mutations and standing genetic variations contribute significantly to 
repeated phenotypic evolution in sticklebacks. However, less is known about the 
role of introgression in this process. We analyzed taxonomically and 
geographically comprehensive genomic data from Pungitius sticklebacks to 
decipher the extent of introgression and its consequences for the 
diversification of this genus. Our results demonstrate that introgression is 
more prevalent than suggested by earlier studies. Although gene flow was 
generally bidirectional, it was often asymmetric and left unequal genomic 
signatures in hybridizing species, which might, at least partly, be due to 
biased hybridization and/or population size differences. In several cases, 
introgression of variants from one species to another was accompanied by 
transitions of pelvic and/or lateral plate structures-important diagnostic 
traits in Pungitius systematics-and frequently left signatures of adaptation in 
the core gene regulatory networks of armor trait development. This finding 
suggests that introgression has been an important source of genetic variation 
and enabled phenotypic convergence among Pungitius sticklebacks. The results 
highlight the importance of introgression of genetic variation as a source of 
adaptive variation underlying key ecological and taxonomic traits. Taken 
together, our study indicates that introgression-driven convergence likely 
explains the long-standing challenges in resolving the taxonomy and systematics 
of this small but phenotypically highly diverse group of fish.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad026
PMCID: PMC9949714
PMID: 36738166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad021. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad021.

Genomic Underpinnings of Population Persistence in Isle Royale Moose.

Kyriazis CC(1), Beichman AC(2), Brzeski KE(3), Hoy SR(3), Peterson RO(3), 
Vucetich JA(3), Vucetich LM(3), Lohmueller KE(1)(4)(5), Wayne RK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(2)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(3)College of Forest Resources and Environmental Science, Michigan Technological 
University, Houghton, MI.
(4)Interdepartmental Program in Bioinformatics, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA.

Island ecosystems provide natural laboratories to assess the impacts of 
isolation on population persistence. However, most studies of persistence have 
focused on a single species, without comparisons to other organisms they 
interact with in the ecosystem. The case study of moose and gray wolves on Isle 
Royale allows for a direct contrast of genetic variation in isolated populations 
that have experienced dramatically differing population trajectories over the 
past decade. Whereas the Isle Royale wolf population recently declined nearly to 
extinction due to severe inbreeding depression, the moose population has thrived 
and continues to persist, despite having low genetic diversity and being 
isolated for ∼120 years. Here, we examine the patterns of genomic variation 
underlying the continued persistence of the Isle Royale moose population. We 
document high levels of inbreeding in the population, roughly as high as the 
wolf population at the time of its decline. However, inbreeding in the moose 
population manifests in the form of intermediate-length runs of homozygosity 
suggestive of historical inbreeding and purging, contrasting with the long runs 
of homozygosity observed in the smaller wolf population. Using simulations, we 
confirm that substantial purging has likely occurred in the moose population. 
However, we also document notable increases in genetic load, which could 
eventually threaten population viability over the long term. Overall, our 
results demonstrate a complex relationship between inbreeding, genetic 
diversity, and population viability that highlights the use of genomic datasets 
and computational simulation tools for understanding the factors enabling 
persistence in isolated populations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad021
PMCID: PMC9927576
PMID: 36729989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad023. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad023.

Jewel Beetle Opsin Duplication and Divergence Is the Mechanism for Diverse 
Spectral Sensitivities.

Sharkey CR(1), Blanco J(1), Lord NP(2), Wardill TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, University of Minnesota, Saint 
Paul, MN.
(2)Department of Entomology, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center, 
Baton Rouge, LA.

The evolutionary history of visual genes in Coleoptera differs from other 
well-studied insect orders, such as Lepidoptera and Diptera, as beetles have 
lost the widely conserved short-wavelength (SW) insect opsin gene that typically 
underpins sensitivity to blue light (∼440 nm). Duplications of the ancestral 
ultraviolet (UV) and long-wavelength (LW) opsins have occurred in many beetle 
lineages and have been proposed as an evolutionary route for expanded spectral 
sensitivity. The jewel beetles (Buprestidae) are a highly ecologically diverse 
and colorful family of beetles that use color cues for mate and host detection. 
In addition, there is evidence that buprestids have complex spectral sensitivity 
with up to five photoreceptor classes. Previous work suggested that opsin 
duplication and subfunctionalization of the two ancestral buprestid opsins, UV 
and LW, has expanded sensitivity to different regions of the light spectrum, but 
this has not yet been tested. We show that both duplications are likely unique 
to Buprestidae or the wider superfamily of Buprestoidea. To directly test 
photopigment sensitivity, we expressed buprestid opsins from two Chrysochroa 
species in Drosophila melanogaster and functionally characterized each 
photopigment type as UV- (356-357 nm), blue- (431-442 nm), green- (507-509 nm), 
and orange-sensitive (572-584 nm). As these novel opsin duplicates result in 
significantly shifted spectral sensitivities from the ancestral copies, we 
explored spectral tuning at four candidate sites using site-directed 
mutagenesis. This is the first study to directly test opsin spectral tuning 
mechanisms in the diverse and specious beetles.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad023
PMCID: PMC9937044
PMID: 36721951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad022. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad022.

Origin and Evolution of Marsupial-specific Imprinting Clusters Through 
Lineage-specific Gene Duplications and Acquisition of Promoter Differential 
Methylation.

Cao W(1)(2), Douglas KC(3), Samollow PB(3), VandeBerg JL(4), Wang X(1)(2)(5)(6), 
Clark AG(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn 
University, Auburn, AL, USA.
(2)Innovation, and Commerce, Alabama Agricultural Experiment Station, Auburn 
University Center for Advanced Science, Auburn, AL, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, School of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 
USA.
(4)South Texas Diabetes and Obesity Institute and Department of Human Genetics, 
School of Medicine, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, Brownsville, TX, 
USA.
(5)Scott-Ritchey Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn 
University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.
(6)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 
USA.

Genomic imprinting is a parent-of-origin-specific expression phenomenon that 
plays fundamental roles in many biological processes. In animals, imprinting is 
only observed in therian mammals, with ∼200 imprinted genes known in humans and 
mice. The imprinting pattern in marsupials has been minimally investigated by 
examining orthologs to known eutherian imprinted genes. To identify 
marsupial-specific imprinting in an unbiased way, we performed RNA-seq studies 
on samples of fetal brain and placenta from the reciprocal cross progeny of two 
laboratory opossum stocks. We inferred allele-specific expression for >3,000 
expressed genes and discovered/validated 13 imprinted genes, including three 
previously known imprinted genes, Igf2r, Peg10, and H19. We estimate that 
marsupials imprint ∼60 autosomal genes, which is a much smaller set compared 
with eutherians. Among the nine novel imprinted genes, three noncoding RNAs have 
no known homologs in eutherian mammals, while the remaining genes have important 
functions in pluripotency, transcription regulation, nucleolar homeostasis, and 
neural differentiation. Methylation analyses at promoter CpG islands revealed 
differentially methylated regions in five of these marsupial-specific imprinted 
genes, suggesting that differential methylation is a common mechanism in the 
epigenetic regulation of marsupial imprinting. Clustering and co-regulation were 
observed at marsupial imprinting loci Pou5f3-Npdc1 and Nkrfl-Ipncr2, but 
eutherian-type multi-gene imprinting clusters were not detected. Also differing 
from eutherian mammals, the brain and placenta imprinting profiles are 
remarkably similar in opossums, presumably due to the shared origin of these 
organs from the trophectoderm. Our results contribute to a fuller understanding 
of the origin, evolution, and mechanisms of genomic imprinting in therian 
mammals.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad022
PMCID: PMC9937046
PMID: 36721950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad017. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad017.

Deciphering the Genetic Basis of Silkworm Cocoon Colors Provides New Insights 
into Biological Coloration and Phenotypic Diversification.

Lu Y(1), Luo J(1), An E(1), Lu B(1)(2), Wei Y(1), Chen X(1)(2), Lu K(1), Liang 
S(1), Hu H(1), Han M(1)(2), He S(1), Shen J(1), Guo D(1), Bu N(1), Yang L(1), Xu 
W(1), Lu C(1), Xiang Z(1), Tong X(1)(2), Dai F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Institute of Sericulture and 
Systems Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Sericulture Biology and Genetic Breeding, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs, College of Sericulture, Textile and Biomass 
Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.

The genetic basis of phenotypic variation is a long-standing concern of 
evolutionary biology. Coloration has proven to be a visual, easily quantifiable, 
and highly tractable system for genetic analysis and is an ever-evolving focus 
of biological research. Compared with the homogenized brown-yellow cocoons of 
wild silkworms, the cocoons of domestic silkworms are spectacularly diverse in 
color, such as white, green, and yellow-red; this provides an outstanding model 
for exploring the phenotypic diversification and biological coloration. Herein, 
the molecular mechanism underlying silkworm green cocoon formation was 
investigated, which was not fully understood. We demonstrated that five of the 
seven members of a sugar transporter gene cluster were specifically duplicated 
in the Bombycidae and evolved new spatial expression patterns predominantly 
expressed in silk glands, accompanying complementary temporal expression; they 
synergistically facilitate the uptake of flavonoids, thus determining the green 
cocoon. Subsequently, polymorphic cocoon coloring landscape involving multiple 
loci and the evolution of cocoon color from wild to domestic silkworms were 
analyzed based on the pan-genome sequencing data. It was found that cocoon 
coloration involved epistatic interaction between loci; all the identified 
cocoon color-related loci existed in wild silkworms; the genetic segregation, 
recombination, and variation of these loci shaped the multicolored cocoons of 
domestic silkworms. This study revealed a new mechanism for flavonoids-based 
biological coloration that highlights the crucial role of gene duplication 
followed by functional diversification in acquiring new genetic functions; 
furthermore, the results in this work provide insight into phenotypic innovation 
during domestication.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad017
PMCID: PMC9937047
PMID: 36718535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad020. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad020.

Plasticity and Stereotypic Rewiring of the Transcriptome Upon Bacterial 
Evolution of Antibiotic Resistance.

Grézal G(1)(2), Spohn R(2), Méhi O(2)(3), Dunai A(2), Lázár V(2)(4), Bálint 
B(2)(5), Nagy I(5)(6), Pál C(2)(7), Papp B(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)HCEMM-BRC Metabolic Systems Biology Lab, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological 
Research Centre, Eötvös Loránd Research Network, Szeged, Hungary.
(3)HCEMM-BRC Translational Microbiology Research Lab, Szeged, Hungary.
(4)HCEMM-BRC Pharmacodynamic Drug Interaction Research Group, Szeged, Hungary.
(5)SeqOmics Biotechnology Ltd., Mórahalom, Hungary.
(6)Sequencing Platform, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological Research Centre, 
Eötvös Loránd Research Network, Szeged, Hungary.
(7)National Laboratory of Biotechnology, Biological Research Centre, Eötvös 
Loránd Research Network, Szeged, Hungary.
(8)National Laboratory for Health Security, Biological Research Centre, Eötvös 
Loránd Research Network, Szeged, Hungary.

Bacterial evolution of antibiotic resistance frequently has deleterious side 
effects on microbial growth, virulence, and susceptibility to other 
antimicrobial agents. However, it is unclear how these trade-offs could be 
utilized for manipulating antibiotic resistance in the clinic, not least because 
the underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. Using laboratory 
evolution, we demonstrate that clinically relevant resistance mutations in 
Escherichia coli constitutively rewire a large fraction of the transcriptome in 
a repeatable and stereotypic manner. Strikingly, lineages adapted to 
functionally distinct antibiotics and having no resistance mutations in common 
show a wide range of parallel gene expression changes that alter oxidative 
stress response, iron homeostasis, and the composition of the bacterial outer 
membrane and cell surface. These common physiological alterations are associated 
with changes in cell morphology and enhanced sensitivity to antimicrobial 
peptides. Finally, the constitutive transcriptomic changes induced by resistance 
mutations are largely distinct from those induced by antibiotic stresses in the 
wild type. This indicates a limited role for genetic assimilation of the induced 
antibiotic stress response during resistance evolution. Our work suggests that 
diverse resistance mutations converge on similar global transcriptomic states 
that shape genetic susceptibility to antimicrobial compounds.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad020
PMCID: PMC9927579
PMID: 36718533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad019. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad019.

Bidirectional Movement of Emerging H5N8 Avian Influenza Viruses Between Europe 
and Asia via Migratory Birds Since Early 2020.

Zhang G(1), Li B(2), Raghwani J(3)(4), Vrancken B(5)(6), Jia R(1), Hill SC(4), 
Fournié G(4), Cheng Y(2), Yang Q(7), Wang Y(2), Wang Z(2), Dong L(8), Pybus 
OG(3)(4), Tian H(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Forest Protection of National Forestry and Grassland 
Administration, Ecology and Nature Conservation Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Forestry, National Bird Banding Center of China, Beijing, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Remote Sensing Science, Center for Global Change and 
Public Health, College of Global Change and Earth System Science, Beijing Normal 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, The Royal Veterinary 
College, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rega Institute, Laboratory of 
Evolutionary and Computational Virology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Spatial Epidemiology Lab (SpELL), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, 
Belgium.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ, USA.
(8)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Ecological 
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 
China.

Migratory birds play a critical role in the rapid spread of highly pathogenic 
avian influenza (HPAI) H5N8 virus clade 2.3.4.4 across Eurasia. Elucidating the 
timing and pattern of virus transmission is essential therefore for 
understanding the spatial dissemination of these viruses. In this study, we 
surveyed >27,000 wild birds in China, tracked the year-round migration patterns 
of 20 bird species across China since 2006, and generated new HPAI H5N8 virus 
genomic data. Using this new data set, we investigated the seasonal transmission 
dynamics of HPAI H5N8 viruses across Eurasia. We found that introductions of 
HPAI H5N8 viruses to different Eurasian regions were associated with the 
seasonal migration of wild birds. Moreover, we report a backflow of HPAI H5N8 
virus lineages from Europe to Asia, suggesting that Europe acts as both a source 
and a sink in the global HPAI virus transmission network.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad019
PMCID: PMC9922686
PMID: 36703230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad018. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad018.

A Single Nucleotide Variant in the PPARγ-homolog Eip75B Affects Fecundity in 
Drosophila.

Hoedjes KM(1)(2), Kostic H(1), Flatt T(3), Keller L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Amsterdam Institute for Life and Environment, section Ecology & Evolution, 
Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms are the most common type of genetic variation, 
but how these variants contribute to the adaptation of complex phenotypes is 
largely unknown. Experimental evolution and genome-wide association studies have 
demonstrated that variation in the PPARγ-homolog Eip75B has associated with 
longevity and life-history differences in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. 
Using RNAi knockdown, we first demonstrate that reduced expression of Eip75B in 
adult flies affects lifespan, egg-laying rate, and egg volume. We then tested 
the effects of a naturally occurring SNP within a cis-regulatory domain of 
Eip75B by applying two complementary approaches: a Mendelian randomization 
approach using lines of the Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel, and allelic 
replacement using precise CRISPR/Cas9-induced genome editing. Our experiments 
reveal that this natural polymorphism has a significant pleiotropic effect on 
fecundity and egg-to-adult viability, but not on longevity or other life-history 
traits. Our results provide a rare functional validation at the nucleotide level 
and identify a natural allelic variant affecting fitness and life-history 
adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad018
PMCID: PMC9922802
PMID: 36703226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad016. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad016.

Correction to: Genomic Consequences of and Demographic Response to Pervasive 
Hybridization Over Time in Climate-Sensitive Pikas.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad016
PMCID: PMC9879739
PMID: 36702783


365. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac271. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac271.

MBE Emerging Classics 2023.

Rowe H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac271
PMCID: PMC9866230
PMID: 36680785


366. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):msad008. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad008.

Estimating Temporally Variable Selection Intensity from Ancient DNA Data.

He Z(1)(2), Dai X(3), Lyu W(4), Beaumont M(5), Yu F(4).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research UK Beatson Institute, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)The Blizard Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, 
Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Mathematics, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.

Novel technologies for recovering DNA information from archaeological and 
historical specimens have made available an ever-increasing amount of temporally 
spaced genetic samples from natural populations. These genetic time series 
permit the direct assessment of patterns of temporal changes in allele 
frequencies and hold the promise of improving power for the inference of 
selection. Increased time resolution can further facilitate testing hypotheses 
regarding the drivers of past selection events such as the incidence of plant 
and animal domestication. However, studying past selection processes through 
ancient DNA (aDNA) still involves considerable obstacles such as postmortem 
damage, high fragmentation, low coverage, and small samples. To circumvent these 
challenges, we introduce a novel Bayesian framework for the inference of 
temporally variable selection based on genotype likelihoods instead of allele 
frequencies, thereby enabling us to model sample uncertainties resulting from 
the damage and fragmentation of aDNA molecules. Also, our approach permits the 
reconstruction of the underlying allele frequency trajectories of the population 
through time, which allows for a better understanding of the drivers of 
selection. We evaluate its performance through extensive simulations and 
demonstrate its utility with an application to the ancient horse samples 
genotyped at the loci for coat coloration. Our results reveal that incorporating 
sample uncertainties can further improve the inference of selection.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad008
PMCID: PMC10063216
PMID: 36661852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad015. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad015.

Cis- and Trans-variations of Stearoyl-CoA Desaturase Provide New Insights into 
the Mechanisms of Diverged Pattern of Phenotypic Plasticity for Temperature 
Adaptation in Two Congeneric Oyster Species.

Wang C(1)(2)(3), Li A(1)(4)(5), Cong R(1)(2)(5), Qi H(1)(2)(5), Wang W(1)(2)(5), 
Zhang G(1)(3)(4)(5), Li L(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)CAS and Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, 
Center for Ocean Mega-Science, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Qingdao, China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Pilot National Laboratory 
for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Laboratory for Marine Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Pilot 
National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China.
(5)National and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory of Ecological Mariculture, 
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China.

The evolution of phenotypic plasticity plays an essential role in adaptive 
responses to climate change; however, its regulatory mechanisms in marine 
organisms which exhibit high phenotypic plasticity still remain poorly 
understood. The temperature-responsive trait oleic acid content and its major 
gene stearoyl-CoA desaturase (Scd) expression have diverged in two allopatric 
congeneric oyster species, cold-adapted Crassostrea gigas and warm-adapted 
Crassostrea angulata. In this study, genetic and molecular methods were used to 
characterize fatty acid desaturation and membrane fluidity regulated by oyster 
Scd. Sixteen causative single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified in 
the promoter/cis-region of the Scd between wild C. gigas and C. angulata. 
Further functional experiments showed that an SNP (g.-333C [C. gigas allele] >T 
[C. angulata allele]) may influence Scd transcription by creating/disrupting the 
binding motif of the positive trans-factor Y-box factor in C. gigas/C. angulata, 
which mediates the higher/lower constitutive expression of Scd in C. gigas/C. 
angulata. Additionally, the positive trans-factor sterol-regulatory 
element-binding proteins (Srebp) were identified to specifically bind to the 
promoter of Scd in both species, and were downregulated during cold stress in C. 
gigas compared to upregulated in C. angulata. This partly explains the 
relatively lower environmental sensitivity (plasticity) of Scd in C. gigas. This 
study serves as an experimental case to reveal that both cis- and 
trans-variations shape the diverged pattern of phenotypic plasticity, which 
provides new insights into the formation of adaptive traits and the prediction 
of the adaptive potential of marine organisms to future climate change.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad015
PMCID: PMC9949715
PMID: 36661848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad014. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad014.

How Many Sirtuin Genes Are Out There? Evolution of Sirtuin Genes in Vertebrates 
With a Description of a New Family Member.

Opazo JC(1)(2)(3), Vandewege MW(4), Hoffmann FG(5)(6), Zavala K(2), Meléndez 
C(7), Luchsinger C(8), Cavieres VA(7), Vargas-Chacoff L(1)(9)(10)(11), Morera 
FJ(1)(12), Burgos PV(7)(13)(14), Tapia-Rojas C(7)(13), Mardones GA(1)(8)(15).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Biology Group, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.
(2)Instituto de Ciencias Ambientales y Evolutivas, Facultad de Ciencias, 
Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.
(3)Millennium Nucleus of Ion Channel-Associated Diseases (MiNICAD), Valdivia, 
Chile.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology, and Plant 
Pathology, Mississippi State University, Starkville, MS.
(6)Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology, Mississippi State 
University, Starkville, MS.
(7)Centro de Biología Celular y Biomedicina (CEBICEM), Facultad de Medicina y 
Ciencia, Universidad San Sebastián, Santiago, Chile.
(8)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Universidad Austral de Chile, 
Valdivia, Chile.
(9)Instituto de Ciencias Marinas y Limnológicas, Universidad Austral de Chile, 
Valdivia, Chile.
(10)Centro Fondap de Investigación de Altas Latitudes (IDEAL), Universidad 
Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.
(11)Millennium Institute Biodiversity of Antarctic and Subantarctic Ecosystems, 
BASE, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.
(12)Applied Biochemistry Laboratory, Facultad de Ciencias Veterinarias, 
Instituto de Farmacología y Morfofisiología, Universidad Austral de Chile, 
Valdivia, Chile.
(13)Centro Ciencia & Vida, Fundación Ciencia & Vida, Santiago, Chile.
(14)Centro de Envejecimiento y Regeneración (CARE-UC), Facultad de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Pontificia Universidad Católica, Santiago, Chile.
(15)Center for Interdisciplinary Studies of the Nervous System (CISNe), 
Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.

Studying the evolutionary history of gene families is a challenging and exciting 
task with a wide range of implications. In addition to exploring fundamental 
questions about the origin and evolution of genes, disentangling their evolution 
is also critical to those who do functional/structural studies to allow a deeper 
and more precise interpretation of their results in an evolutionary context. The 
sirtuin gene family is a group of genes that are involved in a variety of 
biological functions mostly related to aging. Their duplicative history is an 
open question, as well as the definition of the repertoire of sirtuin genes 
among vertebrates. Our results show a well-resolved phylogeny that represents an 
improvement in our understanding of the duplicative history of the sirtuin gene 
family. We identified a new sirtuin gene family member (SIRT3.2) that was 
apparently lost in the last common ancestor of amniotes but retained in all 
other groups of jawed vertebrates. According to our experimental analyses, 
elephant shark SIRT3.2 protein is located in mitochondria, the overexpression of 
which leads to an increase in cellular levels of ATP. Moreover, in vitro 
analysis demonstrated that it has deacetylase activity being modulated in a 
similar way to mammalian SIRT3. Our results indicate that there are at least 
eight sirtuin paralogs among vertebrates and that all of them can be traced back 
to the last common ancestor of the group that existed between 676 and 615 
millions of years ago.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad014
PMCID: PMC9897032
PMID: 36656997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad004. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad004.

Correction to: Genetic Drift Shapes the Evolution of a Highly Dynamic 
Metapopulation.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad004
PMCID: PMC9851334
PMID: 36656683


370. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad009. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad009.

Antifungal Drug Concentration Impacts the Spectrum of Adaptive Mutations in 
Candida albicans.

Todd RT(1), Soisangwan N(1)(2), Peters S(1), Kemp B(1), Crooks T(1), Gerstein 
A(3)(4), Selmecki A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical 
School, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(2)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Graduate Program, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Microbiology, The University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Statistics, The University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.

Invasive fungal infections are a leading global cause of human mortality. Only 
three major classes of antifungal drugs are widely used, and resistance to all 
three classes can arise rapidly. The most widely prescribed antifungal drug, 
fluconazole, disseminates rapidly and reaches a wide range of concentrations 
throughout the body. The impact of drug concentration on the spectrum and effect 
of mutations acquired during adaptation is not known for any fungal pathogen, 
and how the specific level of a given stress influences the distribution of 
beneficial mutations has been poorly explored in general. We evolved 144 
lineages from three genetically distinct clinical isolates of Candida albicans 
to four concentrations of fluconazole (0, 1, 8, and 64 μg/ml) and performed 
comprehensive phenotypic and genomic comparisons of ancestral and evolved 
populations. Adaptation to different fluconazole concentrations resulted in 
distinct adaptive trajectories. In general, lineages evolved to drug 
concentrations close to their MIC50 (the level of drug that reduces growth by 
50% in the ancestor) tended to rapidly evolve an increased MIC50 and acquired 
distinct segmental aneuploidies and copy number variations. By contrast, 
lineages evolved to drug concentrations above their ancestral MIC50 tended to 
acquire a different suite of mutational changes and increased in drug tolerance 
(the ability of a subpopulation of cells to grow slowly above their MIC50). This 
is the first evidence that different concentrations of drug can select for 
different genotypic and phenotypic outcomes in vitro and may explain observed in 
vivo drug response variation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad009
PMCID: PMC9887641
PMID: 36649220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac276. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac276.

Improving Orthologous Signal and Model Fit in Datasets Addressing the Root of 
the Animal Phylogeny.

McCarthy CGP(1), Mulhair PO(1)(2), Siu-Ting K(3), Creevey CJ(3), O'Connell 
MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Computational and Molecular Evolutionary Biology Research Group, School of 
Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, United Kingdom.
(2)Computational and Molecular Evolutionary Biology Research Group, School of 
Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Institute for Global Food Security, School of Biological Sciences, Queen's 
University Belfast, Belfast BT9 5DL, United Kingdom.

There is conflicting evidence as to whether Porifera (sponges) or Ctenophora 
(comb jellies) comprise the root of the animal phylogeny. Support for either a 
Porifera-sister or Ctenophore-sister tree has been extensively examined in the 
context of model selection, taxon sampling, and outgroup selection. The 
influence of dataset construction is comparatively understudied. We re-examine 
five animal phylogeny datasets that have supported either root hypothesis using 
an approach designed to enrich orthologous signal in phylogenomic datasets. We 
find that many component orthogroups in animal datasets fail to recover major 
lineages as monophyletic with the exception of Ctenophora, regardless of the 
supported root. Enriching these datasets to retain orthogroups recovering ≥3 
major lineages reduces dataset size by up to 50% while retaining underlying 
phylogenetic information and taxon sampling. Site-heterogeneous phylogenomic 
analysis of these enriched datasets recovers both Porifera-sister and 
Ctenophora-sister positions, even with additional constraints on outgroup 
sampling. Two datasets which previously supported Ctenophora-sister support 
Porifera-sister upon enrichment. All enriched datasets display improved model 
fitness under posterior predictive analysis. While not conclusively rooting 
animals at either Porifera or Ctenophora, we do see an increase in signal for 
Porifera-sister and a decrease in signal for Ctenophore-sister when data are 
filtered for orthologous signal. Our results indicate that dataset size and 
construction as well as model fit influence animal root inference.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac276
PMCID: PMC9848061
PMID: 36649189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad012. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad012.

Interactomics: Dozens of Viruses, Co-evolving With Humans, Including the 
Influenza A Virus, may Actively Distort Human Aging.

Teulière J(1), Bernard C(1), Bonnefous H(1), Martens J(2), Lopez P(1), Bapteste 
E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Systématique, Evolution, Biodiversité (ISYEB), Sorbonne 
Université, CNRS, Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, EPHE, Université des 
Antilles, Paris, France.
(2)Sciences, Normes, Démocratie (SND), Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Paris, France.

Some viruses (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus 1 and severe acute respiratory 
syndrome coronavirus 2) have been experimentally proposed to accelerate features 
of human aging and of cellular senescence. These observations, along with 
evolutionary considerations on viral fitness, raised the more general puzzling 
hypothesis that, beyond documented sources in human genetics, aging in our 
species may also depend on virally encoded interactions distorting our aging to 
the benefits of diverse viruses. Accordingly, we designed systematic 
network-based analyses of the human and viral protein interactomes, which 
unraveled dozens of viruses encoding proteins experimentally demonstrated to 
interact with proteins from pathways associated with human aging, including 
cellular senescence. We further corroborated our predictions that specific 
viruses interfere with human aging using published experimental evidence and 
transcriptomic data; identifying influenza A virus (subtype H1N1) as a major 
candidate age distorter, notably through manipulation of cellular senescence. By 
providing original evidence that viruses may convergently contribute to the 
evolution of numerous age-associated pathways through co-evolution, our 
network-based and bipartite network-based methodologies support an ecosystemic 
study of aging, also searching for genetic causes of aging outside a focal aging 
species. Our findings, predicting age distorters and targets for anti-aging 
therapies among human viruses, could have fundamental and practical implications 
for evolutionary biology, aging study, virology, medicine, and demography.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad012
PMCID: PMC9897028
PMID: 36649176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad013. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad013.

Re-evaluating Homoploid Reticulate Evolution in Helianthus Sunflowers.

Owens GL(1), Huang K(2), Todesco M(2), Rieseberg LH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Botany and Beaty Biodiversity Center, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Sunflowers of the genus Helianthus are models for hybridization research and 
contain three of the best-studied examples of homoploid hybrid speciation. To 
understand a broader picture of hybridization within the annual sunflowers, we 
used whole-genome resequencing to conduct a phylogenomic analysis and test for 
gene flow between lineages. We find that all annual sunflower species tested 
have evidence of admixture, suggesting hybridization was common during the 
radiation of the genus. Support for the major species tree decreases with 
increasing recombination rate, consistent with hybridization and introgression 
contributing to discordant topologies. Admixture graphs found hybridization to 
be associated with the origins of the three putative hybrid species (Helianthus 
anomalus, Helianthus deserticola, and Helianthus paradoxus). However, the 
hybridization events are more ancient than suggested by previous work. 
Furthermore, H. anomalus and H. deserticola appear to have arisen from a single 
hybridization event involving an unexpected donor, rather than through multiple 
independent events as previously proposed. This means our results are consistent 
with, but not definitive proof of, two ancient independent homoploid hybrid 
speciation events in the genus. Using a broader data set that covers the whole 
Helianthus genus, including perennial species, we find that signals of 
introgression span the genus and beyond, suggesting highly divergent 
introgression and/or the sorting of ancient haplotypes. Thus, Helianthus can be 
viewed as a syngameon in which largely reproductively isolated species are 
linked together by occasional or frequent gene flow.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad013
PMCID: PMC9907532
PMID: 36648104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad011. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad011.

Integrating Phylogenetics With Intron Positions Illuminates the Origin of the 
Complex Spliceosome.

Vosseberg J(1)(2), Stolker D(1), von der Dunk SHA(1), Snel B(1).

Author information:
(1)Theoretical Biology and Bioinformatics, Department of Biology, Faculty of 
Science, Utrecht University, 3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University & Research, 6700 EH 
Wageningen, the Netherlands.

Eukaryotic genes are characterized by the presence of introns that are removed 
from pre-mRNA by a spliceosome. This ribonucleoprotein complex is comprised of 
multiple RNA molecules and over a hundred proteins, which makes it one of the 
most complex molecular machines that originated during the 
prokaryote-to-eukaryote transition. Previous works have established that these 
introns and the spliceosomal core originated from self-splicing introns in 
prokaryotes. Yet, how the spliceosomal core expanded by recruiting many 
additional proteins remains largely elusive. In this study, we use phylogenetic 
analyses to infer the evolutionary history of 145 proteins that we could trace 
back to the spliceosome in the last eukaryotic common ancestor. We found that an 
overabundance of proteins derived from ribosome-related processes was added to 
the prokaryote-derived core. Extensive duplications of these proteins 
substantially increased the complexity of the emerging spliceosome. By comparing 
the intron positions between spliceosomal paralogs, we infer that most 
spliceosomal complexity postdates the spread of introns through the 
proto-eukaryotic genome. The reconstruction of early spliceosomal evolution 
provides insight into the driving forces behind the emergence of complexes with 
many proteins during eukaryogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad011
PMCID: PMC9887622
PMID: 36631250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad010. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad010.

Pervasive Selection for Clinically Relevant Resistance and Media Adaptive 
Mutations at Very Low Antibiotic Concentrations.

Pereira C(1), Warsi OM(1), Andersson DI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.

Experimental evolution studies have shown that weak antibiotic selective 
pressures (i.e., when the antibiotic concentrations are far below the minimum 
inhibitory concentration, MIC) can select resistant mutants, raising several 
unanswered questions. First, what are the lowest antibiotic concentrations at 
which selection for de novo resistance mutations can occur? Second, with weak 
antibiotic selections, which other types of adaptive mutations unrelated to the 
antibiotic selective pressure are concurrently enriched? Third, are the 
mutations selected under laboratory settings at subMIC also observed in clinical 
isolates? We addressed these questions using Escherichia coli populations 
evolving at subMICs in the presence of either of four clinically used 
antibiotics: fosfomycin, nitrofurantoin, tetracycline, and ciprofloxacin. 
Antibiotic resistance evolution was investigated at concentrations ranging from 
1/4th to 1/2000th of the MIC of the susceptible strain (MICsusceptible). Our 
results show that evolution was rapid across all the antibiotics tested, and 
selection for fosfomycin- and nitrofurantoin-resistant mutants was observed at a 
concentration as low as 1/2000th of MICsusceptible. Several of the evolved 
resistant mutants showed increased growth yield and exponential growth rates, 
and outcompeted the susceptible ancestral strain in the absence of antibiotics 
as well, suggesting that adaptation to the growth environment occurred in 
parallel with the selection for resistance. Genomic analysis of the resistant 
mutants showed that several of the mutations selected under these conditions are 
also found in clinical isolates, demonstrating that experimental evolution at 
very low antibiotic levels can help in identifying novel mutations that 
contribute to bacterial adaptation during subMIC exposure in real-life settings.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad010
PMCID: PMC9887637
PMID: 36627817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad007. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad007.

Single-molecule Sequencing of an Animal Mitochondrial Genome Reveals 
Chloroplast-like Architecture and Repeat-mediated Recombination.

Sharbrough J(1), Bankers L(2), Cook E(1), Fields PD(3), Jalinsky J(2), McElroy 
KE(2)(4), Neiman M(2), Logsdon JM(2), Boore JL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, 
Socorro, NM 87801.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA.
(3)Zoologisches Institut, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, IA.
(5)Phenome Health and Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA.

Recent advances in long-read sequencing technology have allowed for 
single-molecule sequencing of entire mitochondrial genomes, opening the door for 
direct investigation of the mitochondrial genome architecture and recombination. 
We used PacBio sequencing to reassemble mitochondrial genomes from two species 
of New Zealand freshwater snails, Potamopyrgus antipodarum and Potamopyrgus 
estuarinus. These assemblies revealed a ∼1.7 kb structure within the 
mitochondrial genomes of both species that was previously undetected by an 
assembly of short reads and likely corresponding to a large noncoding region 
commonly present in the mitochondrial genomes. The overall architecture of these 
Potamopyrgus mitochondrial genomes is reminiscent of the chloroplast genomes of 
land plants, harboring a large single-copy (LSC) region and a small single-copy 
(SSC) region separated by a pair of inverted repeats (IRa and IRb). Individual 
sequencing reads that spanned across the Potamopyrgus IRa-SSC-IRb structure 
revealed the occurrence of a "flip-flop" recombination. We also detected 
evidence for two distinct IR haplotypes and recombination between them in 
wild-caught P. estuarinus, as well as extensive intermolecular recombination 
between single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the LSC region. The chloroplast-like 
architecture and repeat-mediated mitochondrial recombination we describe here 
raise fundamental questions regarding the origins and commonness of inverted 
repeats in cytoplasmic genomes and their role in mitochondrial genome evolution.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad007
PMCID: PMC9874032
PMID: 36625177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msad003. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad003.

The Cynosure of CtBP: Evolution of a Bilaterian Transcriptional Corepressor.

Raicu AM(1), Kadiyala D(2), Niblock M(2), Jain A(3), Yang Y(2), Bird KM(2), 
Bertholf K(4), Seenivasan A(2), Siddiq M(5)(6), Arnosti DN(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
Michigan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan.
(3)Okemos High School.
(4)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program, College of Wooster.
(5)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(6)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.

Evolution of sequence-specific transcription factors clearly drives 
lineage-specific innovations, but less is known about how changes in the central 
transcriptional machinery may contribute to evolutionary transformations. In 
particular, transcriptional regulators are rich in intrinsically disordered 
regions that appear to be magnets for evolutionary innovation. The C-terminal 
Binding Protein (CtBP) is a transcriptional corepressor derived from an 
ancestral lineage of alpha hydroxyacid dehydrogenases; it is found in mammals 
and invertebrates, and features a core NAD-binding domain as well as an 
unstructured C-terminus (CTD) of unknown function. CtBP can act on promoters and 
enhancers to repress transcription through chromatin-linked mechanisms. Our 
comparative phylogenetic study shows that CtBP is a bilaterian innovation whose 
CTD of about 100 residues is present in almost all orthologs. CtBP CTDs contain 
conserved blocks of residues and retain a predicted disordered property, despite 
having variations in the primary sequence. Interestingly, the structure of the 
C-terminus has undergone radical transformation independently in certain 
lineages including flatworms and nematodes. Also contributing to CTD diversity 
is the production of myriad alternative RNA splicing products, including the 
production of "short" tailless forms of CtBP in Drosophila. Additional diversity 
stems from multiple gene duplications in vertebrates, where up to five CtBP 
orthologs have been observed. Vertebrate lineages show fewer major modifications 
in the unstructured CTD, possibly because gene regulatory constraints of the 
vertebrate body plan place specific constraints on this domain. Our study 
highlights the rich regulatory potential of this previously unstudied domain of 
a central transcriptional regulator.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad003
PMCID: PMC9907507
PMID: 36625090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad006. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad006.

Large-Scale Chromosomal Changes Lead to Genome-Level Expression Alterations, 
Environmental Adaptation, and Speciation in the Gayal (Bos frontalis).

Li Y(1), Wang S(2), Zhang Z(1), Luo J(1), Lin GL(1), Deng WD(3), Guo Z(1), Han 
FM(4), Wang LL(4), Li J(1), Wu SF(2), Liu HQ(2), He S(5), Murphy RW(2)(6), Zhang 
ZJ(1), Cooper DN(7), Wu DD(2)(8)(9), Zhang YP(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resource in 
Yunnan and School of Ecology and Environmental Science, Yunnan University, 
Kunming, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Yunnan Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan Agricultural University, 
Kunming, China.
(4)Biomarker Technologies Corporation, Beijing, China.
(5)Nujiang Livestock Technology Promotion Station, Nujiang, China.
(6)Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario Museum, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(8)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(9)Kunming Natural History Museum of Zoology, Kunming Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

Determining the functional consequences of karyotypic changes is invariably 
challenging because evolution tends to obscure many of its own footprints, such 
as accumulated mutations, recombination events, and demographic perturbations. 
Here, we describe the assembly of a chromosome-level reference genome of the 
gayal (Bos frontalis) thereby revealing the structure, at base-pair-level 
resolution, of a telo/acrocentric-to-telo/acrocentric Robertsonian translocation 
(2;28) (T/A-to-T/A rob[2;28]). The absence of any reduction in the recombination 
rate or genetic introgression within the fusion region of gayal served to 
challenge the long-standing view of a role for fusion-induced meiotic 
dysfunction in speciation. The disproportionate increase noted in the distant 
interactions across pro-chr2 and pro-chr28, and the change in open-chromatin 
accessibility following rob(2;28), may, however, have led to the various gene 
expression irregularities observed in the gayal. Indeed, we found that many 
muscle-related genes, located synthetically on pro-chr2 and pro-chr28, exhibited 
significant changes in expression. This, combined with genome-scale structural 
variants and expression alterations in genes involved in myofibril composition, 
may have driven the rapid sarcomere adaptation of gayal to its rugged mountain 
habitat. Our findings not only suggest that large-scale chromosomal changes can 
lead to alterations in genome-level expression, thereby promoting both 
adaptation and speciation, but also illuminate novel avenues for studying the 
relationship between karyotype evolution and speciation.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad006
PMCID: PMC9874039
PMID: 36625089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad005. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad005.

Canalization of Phenotypes-When the Transcriptome is Constantly but Weakly 
Perturbed.

Lu GA(1), Zhang J(1), Zhao Y(1), Chen Q(1), Lin P(1), Tang T(1), Tang Z(1), Wen 
H(1), Liufu Z(2), Wu CI(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Southern Marine 
Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou 510275, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biological Targeting Diagnosis, Therapy and Rehabilitation 
of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510799, China.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60637.

Recent studies have increasingly pointed to microRNAs (miRNAs) as the agent of 
gene regulatory network (GRN) stabilization as well as developmental 
canalization against constant but small environmental perturbations. To analyze 
mild perturbations, we construct a Dicer-1 knockdown line (dcr-1 KD) in 
Drosophila that modestly reduces all miRNAs by, on average, ∼20%. The defining 
characteristic of stabilizers is that, when their capacity is compromised, GRNs 
do not change their short-term behaviors. Indeed, even with such broad 
reductions across all miRNAs, the changes in the transcriptome are very modest 
during development in stable environment. By comparison, broad knockdowns of 
other regulatory genes (esp. transcription factors) by the same method should 
lead to drastic changes in the GRNs. The consequence of destabilization may thus 
be in long-term development as postulated by the theory of canalization. Flies 
with modest miRNA reductions may gradually deviate from the developmental norm, 
resulting in late-stage failures such as shortened longevity. In the optimal 
culture condition, the survival to adulthood is indeed normal in the dcr-1 KD 
line but, importantly, adult longevity is reduced by ∼90%. When flies are 
stressed by high temperature, dcr-1 KD induces lethality earlier in late 
pupation and, as the perturbations are shifted earlier, the affected stages are 
shifted correspondingly. Hence, in late stages of development with deviations 
piling up, GRN would be increasingly in need of stabilization. In conclusion, 
miRNAs appear to be a solution to weak but constant environmental perturbations.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad005
PMCID: PMC9866258
PMID: 36617265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.


380. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad001. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad001.

MaLAdapt Reveals Novel Targets of Adaptive Introgression From Neanderthals and 
Denisovans in Worldwide Human Populations.

Zhang X(1), Kim B(2), Singh A(3), Sankararaman S(3)(4)(5), Durvasula A(6), 
Lohmueller KE(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Adaptive introgression (AI) facilitates local adaptation in a wide range of 
species. Many state-of-the-art methods detect AI with ad-hoc approaches that 
identify summary statistic outliers or intersect scans for positive selection 
with scans for introgressed genomic regions. Although widely used, approaches 
intersecting outliers are vulnerable to a high false-negative rate as the power 
of different methods varies, especially for complex introgression events. 
Moreover, population genetic processes unrelated to AI, such as background 
selection or heterosis, may create similar genomic signals to AI, compromising 
the reliability of methods that rely on neutral null distributions. In recent 
years, machine learning (ML) methods have been increasingly applied to 
population genetic questions. Here, we present a ML-based method called MaLAdapt 
for identifying AI loci from genome-wide sequencing data. Using an Extra-Trees 
Classifier algorithm, our method combines information from a large number of 
biologically meaningful summary statistics to capture a powerful composite 
signature of AI across the genome. In contrast to existing methods, MaLAdapt is 
especially well-powered to detect AI with mild beneficial effects, including 
selection on standing archaic variation, and is robust to non-AI selective 
sweeps, heterosis from deleterious mutations, and demographic misspecification. 
Furthermore, MaLAdapt outperforms existing methods for detecting AI based on the 
analysis of simulated data and the validation of empirical signals through 
visual inspection of haplotype patterns. We apply MaLAdapt to the 1000 Genomes 
Project human genomic data and discover novel AI candidate regions in 
non-African populations, including genes that are enriched in functionally 
important biological pathways regulating metabolism and immune responses.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad001
PMCID: PMC9887621
PMID: 36617238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac265. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac265.

Inaugural Editorial, January 2023.

Gaut BS(1), Russo CAM(2).

Author information:
(1)UC Irvine, Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, 321 Steinhaus 
Hall, Irvine, CA.
(2)Departamento de Genetica, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac265
PMCID: PMC9825318
PMID: 36611012


382. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msad002. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msad002.

Reconstruction of Plastid Proteomes of Apicomplexans and Close Relatives Reveals 
the Major Evolutionary Outcomes of Cryptic Plastids.

Mathur V(1), Salomaki ED(2), Wakeman KC(3), Na I(1), Kwong WK(1), Kolisko M(2), 
Keeling PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, 3156-6270 University 
Blvd., Vancouver V6T 1Z4, BC, Canada.
(2)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České 
Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute for the Advancement of Higher Education, Hokkaido University, 
Sapporo 060-0810, Hokkaido, Japan.

Apicomplexans and related lineages comprise many obligate symbionts of animals; 
some of which cause notorious diseases such as malaria. They evolved from 
photosynthetic ancestors and transitioned into a symbiotic lifestyle several 
times, giving rise to species with diverse non-photosynthetic plastids. Here, we 
sought to reconstruct the evolution of the cryptic plastids in the 
apicomplexans, chrompodellids, and squirmids (ACS clade) by generating five new 
single-cell transcriptomes from understudied gregarine lineages, constructing a 
robust phylogenomic tree incorporating all ACS clade sequencing datasets 
available, and using these to examine in detail, the evolutionary distribution 
of all 162 proteins recently shown to be in the apicoplast by spatial proteomics 
in Toxoplasma. This expanded homology-based reconstruction of plastid proteins 
found in the ACS clade confirms earlier work showing convergence in the overall 
metabolic pathways retained once photosynthesis is lost, but also reveals 
differences in the degrees of plastid reduction in specific lineages. We show 
that the loss of the plastid genome is common and unexpectedly find many 
lineage- and species-specific plastid proteins, suggesting the presence of 
evolutionary innovations and neofunctionalizations that may confer new 
functional and metabolic capabilities that are yet to be discovered in these 
enigmatic organelles.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msad002
PMCID: PMC9847631
PMID: 36610734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac273. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac273.

Escherichia Coli: What Is and Which Are?

Cobo-Simón M(1), Hart R(1), Ochman H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
TX.

Escherichia coli have served as important model organisms for over a 
century-used to elucidate key aspects of genetics, evolution, molecular biology, 
and pathogenesis. However, defining which strains actually belong to this 
species is erratic and unstable due to shifts in the characters and criteria 
used to distinguish bacterial species. Additionally, many isolates designated as 
E. coli are genetically more closely related to strains of Shigella than to 
other E. coli, creating a situation in which the entire genus of Shigella and 
its four species are encompassed within the single species E. coli. We evaluated 
all complete genomes assigned to E. coli and its closest relatives according to 
the biological species concept (BSC), using evidence of reproductive isolation 
and gene flow (i.e., homologous recombination in the case of asexual bacteria) 
to ascertain species boundaries. The BSC establishes a uniform, consistent, and 
objective principle that allows species-level classification across all domains 
of life and does not rely on either phenotypic or genotypic similarity to a 
defined type-specimen for species membership. Analyzing a total of 1,887 
sequenced genomes and comparing our results to other genome-based classification 
methods, we found few barriers to gene flow among the strains, clades, 
phylogroups, or species within E. coli and Shigella. Due to the utility in 
recognizing which strains constitute a true biological species, we designate 
genomes that form a genetic cohesive group as members of E. coliBIO.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac273
PMCID: PMC9830988
PMID: 36585846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac277. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac277.

Long-term Small Population Size, Deleterious Variation, and Altitude Adaptation 
in the Ethiopian Wolf, a Severely Endangered Canid.

Mooney JA(1)(2)(3), Marsden CD(4), Yohannes A(5), Wayne RK(4), Lohmueller 
KE(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Quantitative and Computational Biology, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Ethiopian wolves, a canid species endemic to the Ethiopian Highlands, have been 
steadily declining in numbers for decades. Currently, out of 35 extant species, 
it is now one of the world's most endangered canids. Most conservation efforts 
have focused on preventing disease, monitoring movements and behavior, and 
assessing the geographic ranges of sub-populations. Here, we add an essential 
layer by determining the Ethiopian wolf's demographic and evolutionary history 
using high-coverage (∼40×) whole-genome sequencing from 10 Ethiopian wolves from 
the Bale Mountains. We observe exceptionally low diversity and enrichment of 
weakly deleterious variants in the Ethiopian wolves in comparison with two North 
American gray wolf populations and four dog breeds. These patterns are 
consequences of long-term small population size, rather than recent inbreeding. 
We infer the demographic history of the Ethiopian wolf and find it to be 
concordant with historic records and previous genetic analyses, suggesting 
Ethiopian wolves experienced a series of both ancient and recent bottlenecks, 
resulting in a census population size of fewer than 500 individuals and an 
estimated effective population size of approximately 100 individuals. 
Additionally, long-term small population size may have limited the accumulation 
of strongly deleterious recessive mutations. Finally, as the Ethiopian wolves 
have inhabited high-altitude areas for thousands of years, we searched for 
evidence of high-altitude adaptation, finding evidence of positive selection at 
a transcription factor in a hypoxia-response pathway [CREB-binding protein 
(CREBBP)]. Our findings are pertinent to continuing conservation efforts and 
understanding how demography influences the persistence of deleterious variation 
in small populations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac277
PMCID: PMC9847632
PMID: 36585842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac262. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac262.

High-Quality Genomes of Pangolins: Insights into the Molecular Basis of Scale 
Formation and Adaption to Myrmecophagous Diet.

Yan D(1), Luo X(2)(3), Tang J(4), Xu S(1), Huang K(2)(4), Wang X(3)(4), Feng 
T(3)(4), Que T(5), Jia M(1), Guo X(1), Rehman SU(4), Li Z(4), Yang Y(4), Li 
K(1), Cui K(2), Ruan J(3), Liu Q(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangxi Forestry Research Institute, 530002 Nanning, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Molecular Design and Precise 
Breeding, School of Life Science and Engineering, Foshan University, 528225 
Foshan, China.
(3)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, 
Agricultural Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, 518120 Shenzhen, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, Guangxi University, 530005 Nanning, China.
(5)Guangxi Terrestrial Wildlife Rescue Research and Epidemic Disease Monitoring 
Centre, 530003 Nanning, China.

Pangolins are one of nature's most fascinating species being scales covered and 
myrmecophagous diet, yet relatively little is known about the molecular basis. 
Here, we combine the multi-omics, evolution, and fundamental proteins feature 
analysis of both Chinese and Malayan pangolins, highlighting the molecular 
mechanism of both myrmecophagous diet and scale formation, representing a 
fascinating evolutionary strategy to occupy the unique ecological niches. In 
contrast to conserved organization of epidermal differentiation complex, 
pangolin has undergone large scale variation and gene loss events causing 
expression pattern and function conversion that contribute to cornified 
epithelium structures on stomach to adapt myrmecophagous diet. Our assemblies 
also enable us to discover large copies number of high glycine-tyrosine 
keratin-associated proteins (HGT-KRTAPs). In addition, highly homogenized tandem 
array, amino content, and the specific expression pattern further validate the 
strong connection between the molecular mechanism of scale hardness and 
HGT-KRTAPs.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac262
PMCID: PMC9848057
PMID: 36585823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac279. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac279.

Independent Evolution of Sex Chromosomes and Male Pregnancy-Related Genes in Two 
Seahorse Species.

Long X(1)(2), Charlesworth D(3), Qi J(4), Wu R(5), Chen M(5), Wang Z(1), Xu 
L(6), Fu H(5), Zhang X(5), Chen X(4), He L(4), Zheng L(4), Huang Z(5)(7), Zhou 
Q(1)(6)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)MOE Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis and Protection and Zhejiang 
Provincial Key Laboratory for Cancer Molecular Cell Biology, Life Sciences 
Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
(2)Research Center for Intelligent Computing Platforms, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 
311100, China.
(3)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, West Mains Road, Edinburgh EH9 3LF, UK.
(4)Department of Aquaculture, Fisheries Research Institute of Fujian, Xiamen 
361013, China.
(5)Fujian Key Laboratory of Developmental and Neural Biology & Southern Center 
for Biomedical Research, College of Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, 
Fuzhou, Fujian, China.
(6)MOE Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development, Key 
Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life Sciences, Southwest 
University, Chongqing 400715, China.
(7)Fujian-Macao Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine-Oriented Chronic Disease Prevention and Treatment, Innovation and 
Transformation Center, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou 
350108, China.
(8)Center for Reproductive Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310052, China.
(9)Evolutionary & Organismal Biology Research Center, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.

Unlike birds and mammals, many teleosts have homomorphic sex chromosomes, and 
changes in the chromosome carrying the sex-determining locus, termed 
"turnovers", are common. Recent turnovers allow studies of several interesting 
questions. One question is whether the new sex-determining regions evolve to 
become completely non-recombining, and if so, how and why. Another is whether 
(as predicted) evolutionary changes that benefit one sex accumulate in the newly 
sex-linked region. To study these questions, we analyzed the genome sequences of 
two seahorse species of the Syngnathidae, a fish group in which many species 
evolved a unique structure, the male brood pouch. We find that both seahorse 
species have XY sex chromosome systems, but their sex chromosome pairs are not 
homologs, implying that at least one turnover event has occurred. The Y-linked 
regions occupy 63.9% and 95.1% of the entire sex chromosome of the two species 
and do not exhibit extensive sequence divergence with their X-linked homologs. 
We find evidence for occasional recombination between the extant sex chromosomes 
that may account for their homomorphism. We argue that these Y-linked regions 
did not evolve by recombination suppression after the turnover, but by the 
ancestral nature of the low crossover rates in these chromosome regions. With 
such an ancestral crossover landscape, a turnover can instantly create an 
extensive Y-linked region. Finally, we test for adaptive evolution of male 
pouch-related genes after they became Y-linked in the seahorse.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac279
PMCID: PMC9851323
PMID: 36578180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac278. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac278.

A Phylogenomic Assessment of Processes Underpinning Convergent Evolution in 
Open-Habitat Chats.

Alaei Kakhki N(1), Schweizer M(2)(3), Lutgen D(1)(3)(4), Bowie RCK(5)(6), 
Shirihai H(2), Suh A(7)(8), Schielzeth H(1)(9), Burri R(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Ecology, Institute of Ecology and Evolution, 
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany.
(2)Natural History Museum Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Swiss Ornithological Institute, Sempach, Switzerland.
(5)Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(7)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Department of Organismal Biology - Systematic Biology (EBC), Science for Life 
Laboratory, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(9)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv), 
Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Insights into the processes underpinning convergent evolution advance our 
understanding of the contributions of ancestral, introgressed, and novel genetic 
variation to phenotypic evolution. Phylogenomic analyses characterizing 
genome-wide gene tree heterogeneity can provide first clues about the extent of 
ILS and of introgression and thereby into the potential of these processes or 
(in their absence) the need to invoke novel mutations to underpin convergent 
evolution. Here, we were interested in understanding the processes involved in 
convergent evolution in open-habitat chats (wheatears of the genus Oenanthe and 
their relatives). To this end, based on whole-genome resequencing data from 50 
taxa of 44 species, we established the species tree, characterized gene tree 
heterogeneity, and investigated the footprints of ILS and introgression within 
the latter. The species tree corroborates the pattern of abundant convergent 
evolution, especially in wheatears. The high levels of gene tree heterogeneity 
in wheatears are explained by ILS alone only for 30% of internal branches. For 
multiple branches with high gene tree heterogeneity, D-statistics and 
phylogenetic networks identified footprints of introgression. Finally, long 
branches without extensive ILS between clades sporting similar phenotypes 
provide suggestive evidence for the role of novel mutations in the evolution of 
these phenotypes. Together, our results suggest that convergent evolution in 
open-habitat chats involved diverse processes and highlight that phenotypic 
diversification is often complex and best depicted as a network of interacting 
lineages.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac278
PMCID: PMC10161543
PMID: 36578177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msac275. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac275.

Population Genetic Considerations Regarding Evidence for Biased Mutation Rates 
in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Charlesworth B(1), Jensen JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9PU, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, 85281 AZ.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Mar 4;40(3):

It has recently been proposed that lower mutation rates in gene bodies compared 
with upstream and downstream sequences in Arabidopsis thaliana are the result of 
an "adaptive" modification of the rate of beneficial and deleterious mutations 
in these functional regions. This claim was based both on analyses of mutation 
accumulation lines and on population genomics data. Here, we show that several 
questionable assumptions were used in the population genomics analyses. In 
particular, we demonstrate that the difference between gene bodies and less 
selectively constrained sequences in the magnitude of Tajima's D can in 
principle be explained by the presence of sites subject to purifying selection 
and does not require lower mutation rates in regions experiencing selective 
constraints.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac275
PMCID: PMC9907473
PMID: 36572441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac274. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac274.

Genomic Consequences of and Demographic Response to Pervasive Hybridization Over 
Time in Climate-Sensitive Pikas.

Ge D(1), Wen Z(1), Feijó A(1), Lissovsky A(2), Zhang W(3), Cheng J(1), Yan C(4), 
She H(1), Zhang D(1), Cheng Y(1), Lu L(5), Wu X(6), Mu D(7), Zhang Y(3), Xia 
L(1), Qu Y(1), Vogler AP(8)(9), Yang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China.
(2)Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution RAS, Leninskiy pr. 33, 
Moscow,119071, Russia.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Protein and Plant Gene Research, Peking-Tsinghua 
Center for Life Sciences at College of Life Sciences, Peking University, 
Beijing, 100871, China.
(4)CAS Key Laboratory of Mountain Ecological Restoration and Bioresource 
Utilization & Ecological Restoration and Biodiversity Conservation Key 
Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Diseases Prevention and Control, National 
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, 102206, China.
(6)The Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Application, School of Life 
Science, Institute of Life Science and Green Development, Hebei University, 
Baoding, 071002, China.
(7)Xinjiang Key Laboratory of Biological Resources and Genetic Engineering, 
College of Life Science and Technology, Xinjiang University, Urumqi, 830046, 
China.
(8)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, SW7 5BD, UK.
(9)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park Campus, 
Ascot, SL5 7PY, UK.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):

Rare and geographically restricted species may be vulnerable to genetic effects 
from inbreeding depression in small populations or from genetic swamping through 
hybridization with common species, but a third possibility is that selective 
gene flow can restore fitness (genetic rescue). Climate-sensitive pikas 
(Ochotona spp.) of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau (QHTP) and its vicinity have been 
reduced to residual populations through the movement of climatic zones during 
the Pleistocene and recent anthropogenic disturbance, whereas the plateau pika 
(O. curzoniae) remains common. Population-level whole-genome sequencing (n = 
142) of six closely related species in the subgenus Ochotona revealed several 
phases of ancient introgression, lineage replacement, and bidirectional 
introgression. The strength of gene flow was the greatest from the dominant O. 
curzoniae to ecologically distinct species in areas peripheral to the QHTP. 
Genetic analyses were consistent with environmental reconstructions of past 
population movements. Recurrent periods of introgression throughout the 
Pleistocene revealed an increase in genetic variation at first but subsequent 
loss of genetic variation in later phases. Enhanced dispersion of introgressed 
genomic regions apparently contributed to demographic recovery in three 
peripheral species that underwent range shifts following climate oscillations on 
the QHTP, although it failed to drive recovery of northeastern O. dauurica and 
geographically isolated O. sikimaria. Our findings highlight differences in 
timescale and environmental background to determine the consequence of 
hybridization and the unique role of the QHTP in conserving key evolutionary 
processes of sky island species.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac274
PMCID: PMC9847633
PMID: 36562771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac268. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac268.

Enrichment of Hard Sweeps on the X Chromosome in Drosophila melanogaster.

Harris M(1), Garud NR(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, 
Los Angeles, CA.
(2)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA.

The characteristic properties of the X chromosome, such as male hemizygosity and 
its unique inheritance pattern, expose it to natural selection in a way that can 
be different from the autosomes. Here, we investigate the differences in the 
tempo and mode of adaptation on the X chromosome and autosomes in a population 
of Drosophila melanogaster. Specifically, we test the hypothesis that due to 
hemizygosity and a lower effective population size on the X, the relative 
proportion of hard sweeps, which are expected when adaptation is gradual, 
compared with soft sweeps, which are expected when adaptation is rapid, is 
greater on the X than on the autosomes. We quantify the incidence of hard versus 
soft sweeps in North American D. melanogaster population genomic data with 
haplotype homozygosity statistics and find an enrichment of the proportion of 
hard versus soft sweeps on the X chromosome compared with the autosomes, 
confirming predictions we make from simulations. Understanding these differences 
may enable a deeper understanding of how important phenotypes arise as well as 
the impact of fundamental evolutionary parameters on adaptation, such as 
dominance, sex-specific selection, and sex-biased demography.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac268
PMCID: PMC9825254
PMID: 36546413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msac270. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac270.

A Small Change With a Twist Ending: A Single Residue in EGF-CFC Drives 
Bilaterian Asymmetry.

Truchado-García M(1)(2), Perry KJ(3), Cavodeassi F(1)(4), Kenny NJ(5)(6), Henry 
JQ(3)(7), Grande C(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California-Berkeley, 
571 Weill Hall, Berkeley, CA 94702.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana, 
IL 61801.
(4)Institute of Medical and Biomedical Education, St George's University of 
London, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, United Kingdom.
(5)Natural History Museum, Cromwell Road, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Biochemistry (Te Tari Matū Koiora), University of Otago, 
Dunedin, (Aotearoa) New Zealand.
(7)The Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA 02543.

Asymmetries are essential for proper organization and function of organ systems. 
Genetic studies in bilaterians have shown signaling through the Nodal/Smad2 
pathway plays a key, conserved role in the establishment of body asymmetries. 
Although the main molecular players in the network for the establishment of 
left-right asymmetry (LRA) have been deeply described in deuterostomes, little 
is known about the regulation of Nodal signaling in spiralians. Here, we 
identified orthologs of the egf-cfc gene, a master regulator of the Nodal 
pathway in vertebrates, in several invertebrate species, which includes the 
first evidence of its presence in non-deuterostomes. Our functional experiments 
indicate that despite being present, egf-cfc does not play a role in the 
establishment of LRA in gastropods. However, experiments in zebrafish suggest 
that a single amino acid mutation in the egf-cfc gene in at least the common 
ancestor of chordates was the necessary step to induce a gain of function in LRA 
regulation. This study shows that the egf-cfc gene likely appeared in the 
ancestors of deuterostomes and "protostomes", before being adopted as a 
mechanism to regulate the Nodal pathway and the establishment of LRA in some 
lineages of deuterostomes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac270
PMCID: PMC9907556
PMID: 36537201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac272. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac272.

Exon Elongation Added Intrinsically Disordered Regions to the Encoded Proteins 
and Facilitated the Emergence of the Last Eukaryotic Common Ancestor.

Fukuchi S(1), Noguchi T(2), Anbo H(1), Homma K(1).

Author information:
(1)Program for Information Systems, Division of Informatics, Bioengineering and 
Bioscience, Maebashi Institute of Technology, Maebashi-shi, Japan.
(2)Pharmaceutical Education Research Center, Meiji Pharmaceutical University, 
Kiyose, Tokyo, Japan.

Most prokaryotic proteins consist of a single structural domain (SD) with little 
intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) that by themselves do not adopt stable 
structures, whereas the typical eukaryotic protein comprises multiple SDs and 
IDRs. How eukaryotic proteins evolved to differ from prokaryotic proteins has 
not been fully elucidated. Here, we found that the longer the internal exons 
are, the more frequently they encode IDRs in eight eukaryotes including 
vertebrates, invertebrates, a fungus, and plants. Based on this observation, we 
propose the "small bang" model from the proteomic viewpoint: the protoeukaryotic 
genes had no introns and mostly encoded one SD each, but a majority of them were 
subsequently divided into multiple exons (step 1). Many exons unconstrained by 
SDs elongated to encode IDRs (step 2). The elongated exons encoding IDRs 
frequently facilitated the acquisition of multiple SDs to make the last common 
ancestor of eukaryotes (step 3). One prediction of the model is that long 
internal exons are mostly unconstrained exons. Analytical results of the eight 
eukaryotes are consistent with this prediction. In support of the model, we 
identified cases of internal exons that elongated after the rat-mouse divergence 
and discovered that the expanded sections are mostly in unconstrained exons and 
preferentially encode IDRs. The model also predicts that SDs followed by long 
internal exons tend to have other SDs downstream. This prediction was also 
verified in all the eukaryotic species analyzed. Our model accounts for the 
dichotomy between prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteins and proposes a selective 
advantage conferred by IDRs.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac272
PMCID: PMC9825244
PMID: 36529689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac260. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac260.

A Report by the Editor-in-Chief for Molecular Biology and Evolution (MBE), 
Volume 38.

Kumar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, 
Temple University, 1925 N. 12th Street, Philadelphia 19122, PA.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac260
PMCID: PMC9757670
PMID: 36525539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Feb 3;40(2):msac247. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac247.

Evaluation of Methods to Detect Shifts in Directional Selection at the Genome 
Scale.

Duchemin L(1), Lanore V(1), Veber P(1), Boussau B(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive, Univ Lyon, Univ Lyon 1, CNRS, 
VetAgro Sup, UMR5558, Villeurbanne, France.

Identifying the footprints of selection in coding sequences can inform about the 
importance and function of individual sites. Analyses of the ratio of 
nonsynonymous to synonymous substitutions (dN/dS) have been widely used to 
pinpoint changes in the intensity of selection, but cannot distinguish them from 
changes in the direction of selection, that is, changes in the fitness of 
specific amino acids at a given position. A few methods that rely on amino-acid 
profiles to detect changes in directional selection have been designed, but 
their performances have not been well characterized. In this paper, we 
investigate the performance of six of these methods. We evaluate them on 
simulations along empirical phylogenies in which transition events have been 
annotated and compare their ability to detect sites that have undergone changes 
in the direction or intensity of selection to that of a widely used dN/dS 
approach, codeml's branch-site model A. We show that all methods have reduced 
performance in the presence of biased gene conversion but not CpG 
hypermutability. The best profile method, Pelican, a new implementation of 
Tamuri AU, Hay AJ, Goldstein RA. (2009. Identifying changes in selective 
constraints: host shifts in influenza. PLoS Comput Biol. 5(11):e1000564), 
performs as well as codeml in a range of conditions except for detecting 
relaxations of selection, and performs better when tree length increases, or in 
the presence of persistent positive selection. It is fast, enabling genome-scale 
searches for site-wise changes in the direction of selection associated with 
phenotypic changes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac247
PMCID: PMC9940701
PMID: 36510704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac267. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac267.

Rapid Evolution of the Fine-scale Recombination Landscape in Wild House Mouse 
(Mus musculus) Populations.

Wooldridge LK(1), Dumont BL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME.
(2)Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University, 136 Harrison Ave, 
Boston, MA.

Meiotic recombination is an important evolutionary force and an essential 
meiotic process. In many species, recombination events concentrate into hotspots 
defined by the site-specific binding of PRMD9. Rapid evolution of Prdm9's zinc 
finger DNA-binding array leads to remarkably abrupt shifts in the genomic 
distribution of hotspots between species, but the question of how Prdm9 allelic 
variation shapes the landscape of recombination between populations remains less 
well understood. Wild house mice (Mus musculus) harbor exceptional Prdm9 
diversity, with >150 alleles identified to date, and pose a particularly 
powerful system for addressing this open question. We employed a 
coalescent-based approach to construct broad- and fine-scale sex-averaged 
recombination maps from contemporary patterns of linkage disequilibrium in nine 
geographically isolated wild house mouse populations, including multiple 
populations from each of three subspecies. Comparing maps between wild mouse 
populations and subspecies reveals several themes. First, we report weak fine- 
and broad-scale recombination map conservation across subspecies and 
populations, with genetic divergence offering no clear prediction for 
recombination map divergence. Second, most hotspots are unique to one 
population, an outcome consistent with minimal sharing of Prdm9 alleles between 
surveyed populations. Finally, by contrasting aggregate hotspot activity on the 
X versus autosomes, we uncover evidence for population-specific differences in 
the degree and direction of sex dimorphism for recombination. Overall, our 
findings illuminate the variability of both the broad- and fine-scale 
recombination landscape in M. musculus and underscore the functional impact of 
Prdm9 allelic variation in wild mouse populations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac267
PMCID: PMC9825251
PMID: 36508360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac269. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac269.

A Phylogenetic Framework to Simulate Synthetic Interspecies RNA-Seq Data.

Bastide P(1), Soneson C(2)(3), Stern DB(4), Lespinet O(5), Gallopin M(5).

Author information:
(1)IMAG, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
(2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, 4058 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 430 
Lincoln Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(5)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), Université 
Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Interspecies RNA-Seq datasets are increasingly common, and have the potential to 
answer new questions about the evolution of gene expression. Single-species 
differential expression analysis is now a well-studied problem that benefits 
from sound statistical methods. Extensive reviews on biological or synthetic 
datasets have provided the community with a clear picture on the relative 
performances of the available methods in various settings. However, synthetic 
dataset simulation tools are still missing in the interspecies gene expression 
context. In this work, we develop and implement a new simulation framework. This 
tool builds on both the RNA-Seq and the phylogenetic comparative methods 
literatures to generate realistic count datasets, while taking into account the 
phylogenetic relationships between the samples. We illustrate the usefulness of 
this new framework through a targeted simulation study, that reproduces the 
features of a recently published dataset, containing gene expression data in 
adult eye tissue across blind and sighted freshwater crayfish species. Using our 
simulated datasets, we perform a fair comparison of several approaches used for 
differential expression analysis. This benchmark reveals some of the strengths 
and weaknesses of both the classical and phylogenetic approaches for 
interspecies differential expression analysis, and allows for a reanalysis of 
the crayfish dataset. The tool has been integrated in the R package compcodeR, 
freely available on Bioconductor.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac269
PMID: 36508357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac266. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac266.

Network Topology Can Explain Differences in Pleiotropy Between Cis- and 
Trans-regulatory Mutations.

Vande Zande P(1), Wittkopp PJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

A mutation's degree of pleiotropy (i.e., the number of traits it alters) is 
predicted to impact the probability of the mutation being detrimental to 
fitness. For mutations that impact gene expression, mutations acting in cis have 
been hypothesized to generally be less pleiotropic than mutations affecting the 
same gene's expression in trans, suggesting that cis-regulatory mutations should 
be less deleterious and more likely to fix over evolutionary time. Here, we use 
expression and fitness data from Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene deletion strains 
to test these hypotheses. By treating deletion of each gene as a cis-regulatory 
mutation affecting its own expression and deletions of other genes affecting 
expression of this focal gene as trans-regulatory mutations, we find that 
cis-acting mutations do indeed tend to be less pleiotropic than trans-acting 
mutations affecting expression of the same gene. This pattern was observed for 
the vast majority of genes in the data set and could be explained by the 
topology of the regulatory network controlling gene expression. Comparing the 
fitness of cis- and trans-acting mutations affecting expression of the same gene 
also confirmed that trans-acting deletions tend to be more deleterious. These 
findings provide strong support for pleiotropy playing a role in the 
preferential fixation of cis-regulatory alleles over evolutionary time.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac266
PMCID: PMC9791367
PMID: 36508350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac234. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac234.

Correction to: Comparative Analysis of Mammal Genomes Unveils Key Genomic 
Variability for Human Life Span.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4948-4961.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac234
PMCID: PMC9733419
PMID: 36484573


399. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac257. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac257.

Antibiotic Cycling Affects Resistance Evolution Independently of Collateral 
Sensitivity.

Brepoels P(1), Appermans K(1), Pérez-Romero CA(2), Lories B(1), Marchal K(2), 
Steenackers HP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial and Molecular Systems, Centre of Microbial and Plant 
Genetics (CMPG), KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Information Technology and the Department of Plant 
Biotechnology, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.

Antibiotic cycling has been proposed as a promising approach to slow down 
resistance evolution against currently employed antibiotics. It remains unclear, 
however, to which extent the decreased resistance evolution is the result of 
collateral sensitivity, an evolutionary trade-off where resistance to one 
antibiotic enhances the sensitivity to the second, or due to additional effects 
of the evolved genetic background, in which mutations accumulated during 
treatment with a first antibiotic alter the emergence and spread of resistance 
against a second antibiotic via other mechanisms. Also, the influence of 
antibiotic exposure patterns on the outcome of drug cycling is unknown. Here, we 
systematically assessed the effects of the evolved genetic background by 
focusing on the first switch between two antibiotics against Salmonella 
Typhimurium, with cefotaxime fixed as the first and a broad variety of other 
drugs as the second antibiotic. By normalizing the antibiotic concentrations to 
eliminate the effects of collateral sensitivity, we demonstrated a clear 
contribution of the evolved genetic background beyond collateral sensitivity, 
which either enhanced or reduced the adaptive potential depending on the 
specific drug combination. We further demonstrated that the gradient strength 
with which cefotaxime was applied affected both cefotaxime resistance evolution 
and adaptation to second antibiotics, an effect that was associated with higher 
levels of clonal interference and reduced cost of resistance in populations 
evolved under weaker cefotaxime gradients. Overall, our work highlights that 
drug cycling can affect resistance evolution independently of collateral 
sensitivity, in a manner that is contingent on the antibiotic exposure pattern.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac257
PMCID: PMC9778841
PMID: 36480297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac259. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac259.

Fine-Mapping and Comparative Genomic Analysis Reveal the Gene Composition at the 
S and Z Self-incompatibility Loci in Grasses.

Rohner M(1), Manzanares C(1), Yates S(1), Thorogood D(2), Copetti D(1)(3), 
Lübberstedt T(4), Asp T(5), Studer B(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Plant Breeding, Institute of Agricultural Sciences, ETH Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences (IBERS), 
Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, United Kingdom.
(3)Arizona Genomics Institute, School of Plant Sciences, College of Agriculture 
and Life Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Agronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, USA.
(5)Center for Quantitative Genetics and Genomics, Faculty of Technical Sciences, 
Aarhus University, Slagelse, Denmark.

Self-incompatibility (SI) is a genetic mechanism of hermaphroditic plants to 
prevent inbreeding after self-pollination. Allogamous Poaceae species exhibit a 
unique gametophytic SI system controlled by two multi-allelic and independent 
loci, S and Z. Despite intense research efforts in the last decades, the genes 
that determine the initial recognition mechanism are yet to be identified. Here, 
we report the fine-mapping of the Z-locus in perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne 
L.) and provide evidence that the pollen and stigma components are determined by 
two genes encoding DUF247 domain proteins (ZDUF247-I and ZDUF247-II) and the 
gene sZ, respectively. The pollen and stigma determinants are located 
side-by-side and were genetically linked in 10,245 individuals of two 
independent mapping populations segregating for Z. Moreover, they exhibited high 
allelic diversity as well as tissue-specific gene expression, matching the 
expected characteristics of SI determinants known from other systems. Revisiting 
the S-locus using the latest high-quality whole-genome assemblies revealed a 
similar gene composition and structure as found for Z, supporting the hypothesis 
of a duplicated origin of the two-locus SI system of grasses. Ultimately, 
comparative genomic analyses across a wide range of self-compatible and 
self-incompatible Poaceae species revealed that the absence of a functional copy 
of at least one of the six putative SI determinants is accompanied by a 
self-compatible phenotype. Our study provides new insights into the origin and 
evolution of the unique gametophytic SI system in one of the largest and 
economically most important plant families.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac259
PMCID: PMC9825253
PMID: 36477354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac246. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac246.

Correction to: Bayesian Phylogenetic Inference using Relaxed-clocks and the 
Multispecies Coalescent.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac246
PMCID: PMC9728792
PMID: 36477270


402. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac263. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac263.

Ecology, Not Host Phylogeny, Shapes the Oral Microbiome in Closely Related 
Species.

Moraitou M(1)(2), Forsythe A(1), Fellows Yates JA(3)(4), Brealey JC(5), Warinner 
C(3)(4)(6)(7), Guschanski K(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Animal Ecology, Department of Ecology and Genetics, Uppsala University, 75236 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3FL, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Paleobiotechnology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product 
Research and Infection Biology Hans Knöll Institute, 07745 Jena, Germany.
(5)Department of Natural History, NTNU University Museum, Norwegian University 
of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway.
(6)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Friedrich Schiller University, 07743 Jena, 
Germany.
(7)Department of Anthropology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
(8)Science for Life Laboratory, 75237 Uppsala, Sweden.

Host-associated microbiomes are essential for a multitude of biological 
processes. Placed at the contact zone between external and internal 
environments, the little-studied oral microbiome has important roles in host 
physiology and health. Here, we investigate the roles of host evolutionary 
relationships and ecology in shaping the oral microbiome in three closely 
related gorilla subspecies (mountain, Grauer's, and western lowland gorillas) 
using shotgun metagenomics of 46 museum-preserved dental calculus samples. We 
find that the oral microbiomes of mountain gorillas are functionally and 
taxonomically distinct from the other two subspecies, despite close evolutionary 
relationships and geographic proximity with Grauer's gorillas. Grauer's gorillas 
show intermediate bacterial taxonomic and functional, and dietary profiles. 
Altitudinal differences in gorilla subspecies ranges appear to explain these 
patterns, suggesting a close connection between dental calculus microbiomes and 
the environment, likely mediated through diet. This is further supported by the 
presence of gorilla subspecies-specific phyllosphere/rhizosphere taxa in the 
oral microbiome. Mountain gorillas show a high abundance of nitrate-reducing 
oral taxa, which may promote adaptation to a high-altitude lifestyle by 
modulating blood pressure. Our results suggest that ecology, rather than 
evolutionary relationships and geographic distribution, shape the oral 
microbiome in these closely related species.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac263
PMCID: PMC9778846
PMID: 36472532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac258. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac258.

Epistatic Effects Between Amino Acid Insertions and Substitutions Mediate Toxin 
resistance of Vertebrate Na+,K+-ATPases.

Mohammadi S(1)(2), Özdemir Hİ(3), Ozbek P(3), Sumbul F(4), Stiller J(5), Deng 
Y(5)(6), Crawford AJ(7), Rowland HM(2), Storz JF(8), Andolfatto P(9), Dobler 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Cell and Systems Biology of 
Animals, Universität Hamburg, Hamburg 20146, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Research Group Predators and Toxic 
Prey, Jena 07745, Germany.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, Marmara University, Göztepe, İstanbul 34722, 
Turkey.
(4)INSERM, Aix-Marseille Université, Inserm, CNRS, Marseille 13009, France.
(5)Villum Centre for Biodiversity Genomics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 
2100, Denmark.
(6)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518083, China.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, 
Colombia.
(8)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY.

The recurrent evolution of resistance to cardiotonic steroids (CTS) across 
diverse animals most frequently involves convergent amino acid substitutions in 
the H1-H2 extracellular loop of Na+,K+-ATPase (NKA). Previous work revealed that 
hystricognath rodents (e.g., chinchilla) and pterocliform birds (sandgrouse) 
have convergently evolved amino acid insertions in the H1-H2 loop, but their 
functional significance was not known. Using protein engineering, we show that 
these insertions have distinct effects on CTS resistance in homologs of each of 
the two species that strongly depend on intramolecular interactions with other 
residues. Removing the insertion in the chinchilla NKA unexpectedly increases 
CTS resistance and decreases NKA activity. In the sandgrouse NKA, the amino acid 
insertion and substitution Q111R both contribute to an augmented CTS resistance 
without compromising ATPase activity levels. Molecular docking simulations 
provide additional insight into the biophysical mechanisms responsible for the 
context-specific mutational effects on CTS insensitivity of the enzyme. Our 
results highlight the diversity of genetic substrates that underlie CTS 
insensitivity in vertebrate NKA and reveal how amino acid insertions can alter 
the phenotypic effects of point mutations at key sites in the same protein 
domain.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac258
PMCID: PMC9778839
PMID: 36472530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac264. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac264.

Genetic Drift Shapes the Evolution of a Highly Dynamic Metapopulation.

Angst P(1), Ameline C(1)(2), Haag CR(3)(4), Ben-Ami F(4)(5), Ebert D(1)(4), 
Fields PD(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Zoology, University of Basel, Basel 
4051, Switzerland.
(2)Evolutionary Biology, Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras 2780-156, 
Portugal.
(3)CEFE, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, EPHE, IRD, Montpellier 34293, France.
(4)Tvärminne Zoological Station, University of Helsinki, Hanko 10900, Finland.
(5)George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, School of Zoology, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):

The dynamics of extinction and (re)colonization in habitat patches are 
characterizing features of dynamic metapopulations, causing them to evolve 
differently than large, stable populations. The propagule model, which assumes 
genetic bottlenecks during colonization, posits that newly founded 
subpopulations have low genetic diversity and are genetically highly 
differentiated from each other. Immigration may then increase diversity and 
decrease differentiation between subpopulations. Thus, older and/or less 
isolated subpopulations are expected to have higher genetic diversity and less 
genetic differentiation. We tested this theory using whole-genome 
pool-sequencing to characterize nucleotide diversity and differentiation in 60 
subpopulations of a natural metapopulation of the cyclical parthenogen Daphnia 
magna. For comparison, we characterized diversity in a single, large, and stable 
D. magna population. We found reduced (synonymous) genomic diversity, a proxy 
for effective population size, weak purifying selection, and low rates of 
adaptive evolution in the metapopulation compared with the large, stable 
population. These differences suggest that genetic bottlenecks during 
colonization reduce effective population sizes, which leads to strong genetic 
drift and reduced selection efficacy in the metapopulation. Consistent with the 
propagule model, we found lower diversity and increased differentiation in 
younger and also in more isolated subpopulations. Our study sheds light on the 
genomic consequences of extinction-(re)colonization dynamics to an unprecedented 
degree, giving strong support for the propagule model. We demonstrate that the 
metapopulation evolves differently from a large, stable population and that 
evolution is largely driven by genetic drift.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac264
PMCID: PMC9778854
PMID: 36472514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac252. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac252.

Evolution and Diversity of TGF-β Pathways are Linked with Novel Developmental 
and Behavioral Traits.

Lo WS(1), Roca M(2), Dardiry M(1), Mackie M(3), Eberhardt G(1), Witte H(1), Hong 
R(3), Sommer RJ(1), Lightfoot JW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department for Integrative Evolutionary Biology, Max-Planck Institute for 
Biology Tübingen, Max-Planck Ring 9, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Research Group Genetics of Behavior, Max Planck Institute for 
Neurobiology of Behavior-Caesar, Ludwig-Erhard-Allee 2, 53175, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Biology, California State University, Northridge, CA.

Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling is essential for numerous 
biologic functions. It is a highly conserved pathway found in all metazoans 
including the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, which has also been pivotal in 
identifying many components. Utilizing a comparative evolutionary approach, we 
explored TGF-β signaling in nine nematode species and revealed striking 
variability in TGF-β gene frequency across the lineage. Of the species analyzed, 
gene duplications in the DAF-7 pathway appear common with the greatest disparity 
observed in Pristionchus pacificus. Specifically, multiple paralogues of daf-3, 
daf-4 and daf-7 were detected. To investigate this additional diversity, we 
induced mutations in 22 TGF-β components and generated corresponding double, 
triple, and quadruple mutants revealing both conservation and diversification in 
function. Although the DBL-1 pathway regulating body morphology appears highly 
conserved, the DAF-7 pathway exhibits functional divergence, notably in some 
aspects of dauer formation. Furthermore, the formation of the phenotypically 
plastic mouth in P. pacificus is partially influenced through TGF-β with the 
strongest effect in Ppa-tag-68. This appears important for numerous processes in 
P. pacificus but has no known function in C. elegans. Finally, we observe 
behavioral differences in TGF-β mutants including in chemosensation and the 
establishment of the P. pacificus kin-recognition signal. Thus, TGF-β signaling 
in nematodes represents a stochastic genetic network capable of generating novel 
functions through the duplication and deletion of associated genes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac252
PMCID: PMC9733428
PMID: 36469861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac243. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac243.

Secretary Report.

Singh ND(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, 5289 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 
97403-5289.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac243
PMCID: PMC9720545
PMID: 36468442


407. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac244. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac244.

Treasurer's Report for Financial Year (FY) 2021.

McCutcheon JP(1), Thorne JL(1).

Author information:
(1)SMBE Treasurer.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac244
PMCID: PMC9720543
PMID: 36468441


408. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac261. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac261.

Easy353: A Tool to Get Angiosperms353 Genes for Phylogenomic Research.

Zhang Z(1), Xie P(1), Guo Y(1), Zhou W(2), Liu E(1), Yu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610065, P. R. 
China.
(2)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The Angiosperms353 gene set (AGS) consists of a set of 353 universal low-copy 
nuclear genes that were selected by examining more than 600 angiosperm species. 
These genes can be used for phylogenetic studies and population genetics at 
multiple taxonomic scales. However, current pipelines are not able to recover 
Angiosperms353 genes efficiently and accurately from high-throughput sequences. 
Here, we developed Easy353, a reference-guided assembly tool to recover the AGS 
from high-throughput sequencing (HTS) data (including genome skimming, RNA-seq, 
and target enrichment). Easy353 is an open-source user-friendly assembler for 
diverse types of high-throughput data. It has a graphical user interface and a 
command-line interface that is compatible with all widely-used computer systems. 
Evaluations, based on both simulated and empirical data, suggest that Easy353 
yields low rates of assembly errors.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac261
PMCID: PMC9757696
PMID: 36458838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac256. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac256.

African Suid Genomes Provide Insights into the Local Adaptation to Diverse 
African Environments.

Xie HB(1), Yan C(1)(2), Adeola AC(1)(3)(4), Wang K(5), Huang CP(1)(2), Xu 
MM(1)(2), Qiu Q(5), Yin X(6), Fan CY(6), Ma YF(1)(2), Yin TT(1), Gao Y(1), Deng 
JK(1), Okeyoyin AO(7), Oluwole OO(8), Omotosho O(9), Okoro VMO(10), Omitogun 
OG(11), Dawuda PM(12), Olaogun SC(9), Nneji LM(1)(3), Ayoola AO(1)(2)(3), Sanke 
OJ(13), Luka PD(14), Okoth E(15), Lekolool I(16), Mijele D(16), Bishop RP(15), 
Han J(15)(17), Wang W(1)(5), Peng MS(1)(2)(3), Zhang YP(1)(2)(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution & Yunnan Laboratory 
of Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650201, China.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming 650204, China.
(3)Sino-Africa Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 
650204, China.
(4)Centre for Biotechnology Research, Bayero University, Kano 700006, Nigeria.
(5)School of Ecology and Environment, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 
Xi'an 710129, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming 650091, China.
(7)National Park Service Headquarter, Federal Capital Territory, Abuja 900108, 
Nigeria.
(8)Institute of Agricultural Research and Training, Obafemi Awolowo University, 
Ibadan, Nigeria.
(9)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan 200005, 
Nigeria.
(10)Department of Animal Science and Technology, School of Agriculture and 
Agricultural Technology, Federal University of Technology, Owerri 460114, 
Nigeria.
(11)Department of Animal Sciences, Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife 220282, 
Nigeria.
(12)Department of Veterinary Surgery and Theriogenology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Agriculture Makurdi, Makurdi 970001, Nigeria.
(13)Taraba State Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Jalingo 660213, 
Nigeria.
(14)National Veterinary Research Institute, Vom 930103, Nigeria.
(15)International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), Nairobi 00100, Kenya.
(16)Kenya Wildlife Services, Nairobi 00100, Kenya.
(17)CAAS-ILRI Joint Laboratory on Livestock and Forage Genetic Resources, 
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), 
Beijing 100094, China.

African wild suids consist of several endemic species that represent ancient 
members of the family Suidae and have colonized diverse habitats on the African 
continent. However, limited genomic resources for African wild suids hinder our 
understanding of their evolution and genetic diversity. In this study, we 
assembled high-quality genomes of a common warthog (Phacochoerus africanus), a 
red river hog (Potamochoerus porcus), as well as an East Asian Diannan small-ear 
pig (Sus scrofa). Phylogenetic analysis showed that common warthog and red river 
hog diverged from their common ancestor around the Miocene/Pliocene boundary, 
putatively predating their entry into Africa. We detected species-specific 
selective signals associated with sensory perception and interferon signaling 
pathways in common warthog and red river hog, respectively, which contributed to 
their local adaptation to savannah and tropical rainforest environments, 
respectively. The structural variation and evolving signals in genes involved in 
T-cell immunity, viral infection, and lymphoid development were identified in 
their ancestral lineage. Our results provide new insights into the evolutionary 
histories and divergent genetic adaptations of African suids.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac256
PMCID: PMC9733430
PMID: 36413509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac250. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac250.

Substrate Affinity Versus Catalytic Efficiency: Ancestral Sequence 
Reconstruction of tRNA Nucleotidyltransferases Solves an Enzyme Puzzle.

Hager M(1), Pöhler MT(1), Reinhardt F(2)(3), Wellner K(1), Hübner J(2), Betat 
H(1), Prohaska S(2)(3)(4)(5), Mörl M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, Leipzig University, Brüderstraße 34, D-04103 
Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Computational EvoDevo Group, Institute for Computer Science, Leipzig 
University, Härtelstr. 16-18, 04109 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Centre for Bioinformatics, Leipzig University, Härtelstr. 
16-18, 04109 Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA.
(5)Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Josefstädter Str. 39, 1080 Wien, Austria.

In tRNA maturation, CCA-addition by tRNA nucleotidyltransferase is a unique and 
highly accurate reaction. While the mechanism of nucleotide selection and 
polymerization is well understood, it remains a mystery why bacterial and 
eukaryotic enzymes exhibit an unexpected and surprisingly low tRNA substrate 
affinity while they efficiently catalyze the CCA-addition. To get insights into 
the evolution of this high-fidelity RNA synthesis, the reconstruction and 
characterization of ancestral enzymes is a versatile tool. Here, we investigate 
a reconstructed candidate of a 2 billion years old CCA-adding enzyme from 
Gammaproteobacteria and compare it to the corresponding modern enzyme of 
Escherichia coli. We show that the ancestral candidate catalyzes an error-free 
CCA-addition, but has a much higher tRNA affinity compared with the extant 
enzyme. The consequence of this increased substrate binding is an enhanced 
reverse reaction, where the enzyme removes the CCA end from the mature tRNA. As 
a result, the ancestral candidate exhibits a lower catalytic efficiency in vitro 
as well as in vivo. Furthermore, the efficient tRNA interaction leads to a 
processive polymerization, while the extant enzyme catalyzes nucleotide addition 
in a distributive way. Thus, the modern enzymes increased their polymerization 
efficiency by lowering the binding affinity to tRNA, so that CCA synthesis is 
efficiently promoted due to a reduced reverse reaction. Hence, the puzzling and 
at a first glance contradicting and detrimental weak substrate interaction 
represents a distinct activity enhancement in the evolution of CCA-adding 
enzymes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac250
PMCID: PMC9728577
PMID: 36409584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac255. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac255.

Challenging the Importance of Plastid Genome Structure Conservation: New 
Insights From Euglenophytes.

Maciszewski K(1), Fells A(1), Karnkowska A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, Biological and 
Chemical Research Centre, University of Warsaw, Żwirki i Wigury 101, 02-089 
Warsaw, Poland.

Plastids, similar to mitochondria, are organelles of endosymbiotic origin, which 
retained their vestigial genomes (ptDNA). Their unique architecture, commonly 
referred to as the quadripartite (four-part) structure, is considered to be 
strictly conserved; however, the bulk of our knowledge on their variability and 
evolutionary transformations comes from studies of the primary plastids of green 
algae and land plants. To broaden our perspective, we obtained seven new ptDNA 
sequences from freshwater species of photosynthetic euglenids-a group that 
obtained secondary plastids, known to have dynamically evolving genome 
structure, via endosymbiosis with a green alga. Our analyses have demonstrated 
that the evolutionary history of euglenid plastid genome structure is 
exceptionally convoluted, with a patchy distribution of inverted ribosomal 
operon (rDNA) repeats, as well as several independent acquisitions of tandemly 
repeated rDNA copies. Moreover, we have shown that inverted repeats in euglenid 
ptDNA do not share their genome-stabilizing property documented in chlorophytes. 
We hypothesize that the degeneration of the quadripartite structure of euglenid 
plastid genomes is connected to the group II intron expansion. These findings 
challenge the current global paradigms of plastid genome architecture evolution 
and underscore the often-underestimated divergence between the functionality of 
shared traits in primary and complex plastid organelles.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac255
PMCID: PMC9728796
PMID: 36403966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac249. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac249.

The Impact of Genetic Surfing on Neutral Genomic Diversity.

Schlichta F(1)(2), Peischl S(2)(3), Excoffier L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Computational and Molecular Population Genetics lab, Institute of Ecology and 
Evolution, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, 3012 Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Interfaculty Bioinformatics Unit, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 6, 3012 
Bern, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Oct 4;40(10):

Range expansions have been common in the history of most species. Serial founder 
effects and subsequent population growth at expansion fronts typically lead to a 
loss of genomic diversity along the expansion axis. A frequent consequence is 
the phenomenon of "gene surfing," where variants located near the expanding 
front can reach high frequencies or even fix in newly colonized territories. 
Although gene surfing events have been characterized thoroughly for a specific 
locus, their effects on linked genomic regions and the overall patterns of 
genomic diversity have been little investigated. In this study, we simulated the 
evolution of whole genomes during several types of 1D and 2D range expansions 
differing by the extent of migration, founder events, and recombination rates. 
We focused on the characterization of local dips of diversity, or "troughs," 
taken as a proxy for surfing events. We find that, for a given recombination 
rate, once we consider the amount of diversity lost since the beginning of the 
expansion, it is possible to predict the initial evolution of trough density and 
their average width irrespective of the expansion condition. Furthermore, when 
recombination rates vary across the genome, we find that troughs are 
over-represented in regions of low recombination. Therefore, range expansions 
can leave local and global genomic signatures often interpreted as evidence of 
past selective events. Given the generality of our results, they could be used 
as a null model for species having gone through recent expansions, and thus be 
helpful to correctly interpret many evolutionary biology studies.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac249
PMCID: PMC9703594
PMID: 36403964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac254. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac254.

From Easy to Hopeless-Predicting the Difficulty of Phylogenetic Analyses.

Haag J(1), Höhler D(1), Bettisworth B(1), Stamatakis A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
Karlsruhe, Germany.

Phylogenetic analyzes under the Maximum-Likelihood (ML) model are time and 
resource intensive. To adequately capture the vastness of tree space, one needs 
to infer multiple independent trees. On some datasets, multiple tree inferences 
converge to similar tree topologies, on others to multiple, topologically highly 
distinct yet statistically indistinguishable topologies. At present, no method 
exists to quantify and predict this behavior. We introduce a method to quantify 
the degree of difficulty for analyzing a dataset and present Pythia, a Random 
Forest Regressor that accurately predicts this difficulty. Pythia predicts the 
degree of difficulty of analyzing a dataset prior to initiating ML-based tree 
inferences. Pythia can be used to increase user awareness with respect to the 
amount of signal and uncertainty to be expected in phylogenetic analyzes, and 
hence inform an appropriate (post-)analysis setup. Further, it can be used to 
select appropriate search algorithms for easy-, intermediate-, and 
hard-to-analyze datasets.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac254
PMCID: PMC9728795
PMID: 36395091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac253. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac253.

Markhor-derived Introgression of a Genomic Region Encompassing PAPSS2 Confers 
High-altitude Adaptability in Tibetan Goats.

Li C(1)(2), Wu Y(3), Chen B(1), Cai Y(1), Guo J(4), Leonard AS(2), Kalds P(1), 
Zhou S(1)(5), Zhang J(5), Zhou P(6)(7), Gan S(6)(7), Jia T(8), Pu T(8), Suo 
L(3), Li Y(1), Zhang K(1), Li L(1), Purevdorj M(9), Wang X(1), Li M(1), Wang 
Y(1), Liu Y(1), Huang S(1), Sonstegard T(10), Wang MS(11), Kemp S(12), Pausch 
H(2), Chen Y(1), Han JL(12)(13), Jiang Y(1), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)International Joint Agriculture Research Center for Animal Bio-Breeding, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi Province, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, China.
(2)Animal Genomics, ETH Zürich, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Animal Science, Tibet Academy of Agricultural and Animal 
Husbandry Sciences, Lhasa 850009, China.
(4)College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Chengdu 611130, China.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, 
China.
(6)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Xinjiang Academy of 
Agricultural and Reclamation Sciences, Shihezi 832000, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Sheep Genetic Improvement and Healthy Breeding, 
Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural and Reclamation Sciences, Shihezi 832000, 
China.
(8)Beijing Key Laboratory of Captive Wildlife Technologies, Beijing Zoo, Beijing 
100044, China.
(9)Lab of Animal Genetics and Animal Reproductive Technology, Research Institute 
of Animal Husbandry, Mongolian University of Life Sciences, Ulaanbaatar 17024, 
Mongolia.
(10)Acceligen Inc., St. Paul, MN 55104.
(11)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa 
Cruz, CA 94720.
(12)Livestock Genetics Program, International Livestock Research Institute 
(ILRI), Nairobi 30709-00100, Kenya.
(13)CAAS-ILRI Joint Laboratory on Livestock and Forage Genetic Resources, 
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), 
Beijing 100193, China.

Understanding the genetic mechanism of how animals adapt to extreme conditions 
is fundamental to determine the relationship between molecular evolution and 
changing environments. Goat is one of the first domesticated species and has 
evolved rapidly to adapt to diverse environments, including harsh high-altitude 
conditions with low temperature and poor oxygen supply but strong ultraviolet 
radiation. Here, we analyzed 331 genomes of domestic goats and wild caprid 
species living at varying altitudes (high > 3000 m above sea level and low < 
1200 m), along with a reference-guided chromosome-scale assembly (contig-N50: 
90.4 Mb) of a female Tibetan goat genome based on PacBio HiFi long reads, to 
dissect the genetic determinants underlying their adaptation to harsh conditions 
on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau (QTP). Population genomic analyses combined with 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) revealed a genomic region harboring the 
3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate synthase 2 (PAPSS2) gene showing strong 
association with high-altitude adaptability (PGWAS = 3.62 × 10-25) in Tibetan 
goats. Transcriptomic data from 13 tissues revealed that PAPSS2 was implicated 
in hypoxia-related pathways in Tibetan goats. We further verified potential 
functional role of PAPSS2 in response to hypoxia in PAPSS2-deficient cells. 
Introgression analyses suggested that the PAPSS2 haplotype conferring the 
high-altitude adaptability in Tibetan goats originated from a recent 
hybridization between goats and a wild caprid species, the markhor (Capra 
falconeri). In conclusion, our results uncover a hitherto unknown contribution 
of PAPSS2 to high-altitude adaptability in Tibetan goats on QTP, following 
interspecific introgression and natural selection.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac253
PMCID: PMC9728798
PMID: 36382357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac245. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac245.

Correction to: A Bayesian Implementation of the Multispecies Coalescent Model 
with Introgression for Phylogenomic Analysis.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1211-1223.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac245
PMCID: PMC9665057
PMID: 36378497


416. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac238. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac238.

Correction to: Evolutionary Tuning of Transient Receptor Potential Ankyrin 1 
Underlies the Variation in Heat Avoidance Behaviors among Frog Species 
Inhabiting Diverse Thermal Niches.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac238
PMCID: PMC9665060
PMID: 36378496


417. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac251. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac251.

Ecological Speciation Promoted by Divergent Regulation of Functional Genes 
Within African Cichlid Fishes.

Carruthers M(1), Edgley DE(1), Saxon AD(1), Gabagambi NP(2), Shechonge A(3), 
Miska EA(4)(5)(6), Durbin R(5)(6), Bridle JR(1), Turner GF(7), Genner MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TQ, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Tanzanian Fisheries Research Institute, Kyela Research Centre, P.O. Box 98, 
Kyela, Mbeya, Tanzania.
(3)Tanzanian Fisheries Research Institute, Dar es Salaam Research Centre, P.O. 
Box 9750, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(4)Wellcome/CRUK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1QN, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EH, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge CB10 1SA, United 
Kingdom.
(7)School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, Wales LL57 2UW, United 
Kingdom.

Rapid ecological speciation along depth gradients has taken place repeatedly in 
freshwater fishes, yet molecular mechanisms facilitating such diversification 
are typically unclear. In Lake Masoko, an African crater lake, the cichlid 
Astatotilapia calliptera has diverged into shallow-littoral and deep-benthic 
ecomorphs with strikingly different jaw structures within the last 1,000 years. 
Using genome-wide transcriptome data, we explore two major regulatory 
transcriptional mechanisms, expression and splicing-QTL variants, and examine 
their contributions to differential gene expression underpinning functional 
phenotypes. We identified 7,550 genes with significant differential expression 
between ecomorphs, of which 5.4% were regulated by cis-regulatory expression 
QTLs, and 9.2% were regulated by cis-regulatory splicing QTLs. We also found 
strong signals of divergent selection on differentially expressed genes 
associated with craniofacial development. These results suggest that large-scale 
transcriptome modification plays an important role during early-stage 
speciation. We conclude that regulatory variants are important targets of 
selection driving ecologically relevant divergence in gene expression during 
adaptive diversification.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac251
PMCID: PMC10101686
PMID: 36376993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac248. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac248.

Adaptation in Outbred Sexual Yeast is Repeatable, Polygenic and Favors Rare 
Haplotypes.

Linder RA(1), Zabanavar B(1), Majumder A(1), Hoang HC(1), Delgado VG(1), Tran 
R(1), La VT(1), Leemans SW(2), Long AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological 
Sciences, University of California, Irvine.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Engineering, University of 
California, Irvine.

We carried out a 200 generation Evolve and Resequence (E&R) experiment initiated 
from an outbred diploid recombined 18-way synthetic base population. Replicate 
populations were evolved at large effective population sizes (>105 individuals), 
exposed to several different chemical challenges over 12 weeks of evolution, and 
whole-genome resequenced. Weekly forced outcrossing resulted in an average 
between adjacent-gene per cell division recombination rate of ∼0.0008. Despite 
attempts to force weekly sex, roughly half of our populations evolved cheaters 
and appear to be evolving asexually. Focusing on seven chemical stressors and 55 
total evolved populations that remained sexual we observed large fitness gains 
and highly repeatable patterns of genome-wide haplotype change within chemical 
challenges, with limited levels of repeatability across chemical treatments. 
Adaptation appears highly polygenic with almost the entire genome showing 
significant and consistent patterns of haplotype change with little evidence for 
long-range linkage disequilibrium in a subset of populations for which we 
sequenced haploid clones. That is, almost the entire genome is under selection 
or drafting with selected sites. At any given locus adaptation was almost always 
dominated by one of the 18 founder's alleles, with that allele varying spatially 
and between treatments, suggesting that selection acts primarily on rare 
variants private to a founder or haplotype blocks harboring multiple mutations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac248
PMCID: PMC9728589
PMID: 36366952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac242. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac242.

The Dynamics of Adaptation to Stress from Standing Genetic Variation and de novo 
Mutations.

Ament-Velásquez SL(1), Gilchrist C(1), Rêgo A(1), Bendixsen DP(1), Brice C(1), 
Grosse-Sommer JM(1)(2), Rafati N(3), Stelkens R(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Population Genetics, Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, 
Svante Arrheniusväg 18 B, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Faculty of Science and Engineering, Maastricht University, Paul-Henri 
Spaaklaan 1, 6229 EN Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, National Bioinformatics 
Infrastructure Sweden, Uppsala University, SciLifeLab, 751 23 Uppsala, Sweden.

Adaptation from standing genetic variation is an important process underlying 
evolution in natural populations, but we rarely get the opportunity to observe 
the dynamics of fitness and genomic changes in real time. Here, we used 
experimental evolution and Pool-Seq to track the phenotypic and genomic changes 
of genetically diverse asexual populations of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
in four environments with different fitness costs. We found that populations 
rapidly and in parallel increased in fitness in stressful environments. In 
contrast, allele frequencies showed a range of trajectories, with some 
populations fixing all their ancestral variation in <30 generations and others 
maintaining diversity across hundreds of generations. We detected parallelism at 
the genomic level (involving genes, pathways, and aneuploidies) within and 
between environments, with idiosyncratic changes recurring in the environments 
with higher stress. In particular, we observed a tendency of becoming 
haploid-like in one environment, whereas the populations of another environment 
showed low overall parallelism driven by standing genetic variation despite high 
selective pressure. This work highlights the interplay between standing genetic 
variation and the influx of de novo mutations in populations adapting to a range 
of selective pressures with different underlying trait architectures, advancing 
our understanding of the constraints and drivers of adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac242
PMCID: PMC9703598
PMID: 36334099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac239. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac239.

Allele-specific Expression Reveals Multiple Paths to Highland Adaptation in 
Maize.

Hu H(1), Crow T(1), Nojoomi S(1), Schulz AJ(2), Estévez-Palmas JM(3), Hufford 
MB(2), Flint-Garcia S(4)(5), Sawers R(6), Rellán-Álvarez R(3)(7), Ross-Ibarra 
J(8), Runcie DE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, CA.
(2)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA.
(3)National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity, Irapuato, México.
(4)United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, 
Columbia, MO.
(5)Division of Plant Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO.
(6)Department of Plant Science, The Pennsylvania State University, State 
College, PA.
(7)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, NC.
(8)Department of Evolution and Ecology, Center for Population Biology, and 
Genome Center, University of California, Davis, CA.

Maize is a staple food of smallholder farmers living in highland regions up to 
4,000 m above sea level worldwide. Mexican and South American highlands are two 
major highland maize growing regions, and population genetic data suggest the 
maize's adaptation to these regions occurred largely independently, providing a 
case study for convergent evolution. To better understand the mechanistic basis 
of highland adaptation, we crossed maize landraces from 108 highland and lowland 
sites of Mexico and South America with the inbred line B73 to produce F1 hybrids 
and grew them in both highland and lowland sites in Mexico. We identified 
thousands of genes with divergent expression between highland and lowland 
populations. Hundreds of these genes show patterns of convergent evolution 
between Mexico and South America. To dissect the genetic architecture of the 
divergent gene expression, we developed a novel allele-specific expression 
analysis pipeline to detect genes with divergent functional cis-regulatory 
variation between highland and lowland populations. We identified hundreds of 
genes with divergent cis-regulation between highland and lowland landrace 
alleles, with 20 in common between regions, further suggesting convergence in 
the genes underlying highland adaptation. Further analyses suggest multiple 
mechanisms contribute to this convergence in gene regulation. Although the vast 
majority of evolutionary changes associated with highland adaptation were region 
specific, our findings highlight an important role for convergence at the gene 
expression and gene regulation levels as well.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac239
PMCID: PMC9692238
PMID: 36327321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac241. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac241.

Blue Turns to Gray: Paleogenomic Insights into the Evolutionary History and 
Extinction of the Blue Antelope (Hippotragus leucophaeus).

Hempel E(1)(2), Bibi F(2), Faith JT(3)(4)(5), Koepfli KP(6)(7), Klittich AM(1), 
Duchêne DA(8)(9), Brink JS(10)(11), Kalthoff DC(12), Dalén L(13)(14)(15), 
Hofreiter M(1), Westbury MV(8).

Author information:
(1)Evolutionary Adaptive Genomics, Institute for Biochemistry and Biology, 
Department of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Potsdam, 
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476 Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz Institute for Evolution and Biodiversity 
Science, Invalidenstraße 43, 10115 Berlin, Germany.
(3)Natural History Museum of Utah, University of Utah, 301 Wakara Way, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84108.
(4)Department of Anthropology, University of Utah, 260 South Central Campus 
Drive, Salt Lake City, UT 84112.
(5)Origins Centre, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, Republic of 
South Africa.
(6)Smithsonian-Mason School of Conservation, George Mason University, Front 
Royal, VA 22630.
(7)Center for Species Survival, Smithsonian's National Zoo and Conservation 
Biology Institute, Washington, DC, 20008, USA.
(8)Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5-7, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(9)Centre for Evolutionary Hologenomics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 
1352, Denmark.
(10)National Museum Bloemfontein, Florisbad Quaternary Research Station and 
Department, PO Box 266, Bloemfontein 9031, Republic of South Africa.
(11)Centre for Environmental Management, University of the Free State, PO Box 
339, Bloemfontein 9300, Republic of South Africa.
(12)Swedish Museum of Natural History, Department of Zoology, Box 50007, 10405 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(13)Swedish Museum of Natural History, Department of Bioinformatics and 
Genetics, Box 50007, 10405 Stockholm, Sweden.
(14)Centre for Palaeogenetics, Svante Arrhenius väg 20c, 10691 Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(15)Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, 10691 Stockholm, Sweden.

The blue antelope (Hippotragus leucophaeus) is the only large African mammal 
species to have become extinct in historical times, yet no nuclear genomic 
information is available for this species. A recent study showed that many 
alleged blue antelope museum specimens are either roan (Hippotragus equinus) or 
sable (Hippotragus niger) antelopes, further reducing the possibilities for 
obtaining genomic information for this extinct species. While the blue antelope 
has a rich fossil record from South Africa, climatic conditions in the region 
are generally unfavorable to the preservation of ancient DNA. Nevertheless, we 
recovered two blue antelope draft genomes, one at 3.4× mean coverage from a 
historical specimen (∼200 years old) and one at 2.1× mean coverage from a fossil 
specimen dating to 9,800-9,300 cal years BP, making it currently the oldest 
paleogenome from Africa. Phylogenomic analyses show that blue and sable antelope 
are sister species, confirming previous mitogenomic results, and demonstrate 
ancient gene flow from roan into blue antelope. We show that blue antelope 
genomic diversity was much lower than in roan and sable antelope, indicative of 
a low population size since at least the early Holocene. This supports 
observations from the fossil record documenting major decreases in the abundance 
of blue antelope after the Pleistocene-Holocene transition. Finally, the 
persistence of this species throughout the Holocene despite low population size 
suggests that colonial-era human impact was likely the decisive factor in the 
blue antelope's extinction.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac241
PMCID: PMC9750129
PMID: 36322483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac240. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac240.

Rearranged Endogenized Plant Pararetroviruses as Evidence of Heritable RNA-based 
Immunity.

Valli AA(1), Gonzalo-Magro I(1), Sanchez DH(2).

Author information:
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), Calle Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)IFEVA (CONICET-UBA), Facultad de Agronomía, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Av 
San Martín 4453, C1417DSE Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Eukaryotic genomics frequently revealed historical spontaneous endogenization 
events of external invading nucleic acids, such as viral elements. In plants, an 
extensive occurrence of endogenous plant pararetroviruses (EPRVs) is usually 
believed to endow hosts with an additional layer of internal suppressive 
weaponry. However, an actual demonstration of this activity remains speculative. 
We analyzed the EPRV component and accompanying silencing effectors of Solanum 
lycopersicum, documenting that intronic/intergenic pararetroviral integrations 
bearing inverted-repeats fuel the plant's RNA-based immune system with suitable 
transcripts capable of evoking a silencing response. A surprisingly small set of 
rearrangements explained a substantial fraction of pararetroviral-derived 
endogenous small-interfering (si)RNAs, enriched in 22-nt forms typically 
associated with anti-viral post-transcriptional gene silencing. We provide 
preliminary evidence that such genetic and immunological signals may be found in 
other species outside the genus Solanum. Based on molecular dating, 
bioinformatics, and empirical explorations, we propose that homology-dependent 
silencing emerging from particular immuno-competent rearranged chromosomal areas 
that constitute an adaptive heritable trans-acting record of past infections, 
with potential impact against the unlocking of plant latent EPRVs and 
cognate-free pararetroviruses.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac240
PMCID: PMC9868043
PMID: 36322467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement The authors 
declare no competing interests.


423. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac219. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac219.

RNAseq Analysis of Brain Aging in Wild Specimens of Short-Lived Turquoise 
Killifish: Commonalities and Differences With Aging Under Laboratory Conditions.

Mazzetto M(1)(2), Caterino C(1), Groth M(1), Ferrari E(2), Reichard M(3)(4)(5), 
Baumgart M(1), Cellerino A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biology of Ageing, Leibniz Institute for Age Research-Fritz Lipmann Institute 
e.V. (FLI), Beutenbergstr. 11, 07745 Jena, Germany.
(2)Bio@SNS, Scuola Normale Superiore, Department of Neurosciences, Piazza dei 
Cavalieri 7, 56126 Pisa, Italy.
(3)Institute of Vertebrate Biology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Květná 8, 603 65 
Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Ecology and Vertebrate Zoology, University of Łódź, 90-237 
Łódź, Poland.
(5)Department of Botany and Zoology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, 611 
37 Brno, Czech Republic.

A vast body of studies is available that describe age-dependent gene expression 
in relation to aging in a number of different model species. These data were 
obtained from animals kept in conditions with reduced environmental challenges, 
abundant food, and deprivation of natural sensory stimulation. Here, we compared 
wild- and captive aging in the short-lived turquoise killifish (Nothobranchius 
furzeri). These fish inhabit temporary ponds in the African savannah. When the 
ponds are flooded, eggs hatch synchronously, enabling a precise timing of their 
individual and population age. We collected the brains of wild fish of different 
ages and quantified the global age-dependent regulation of transcripts using 
RNAseq. A major difference between captive and wild populations is that wild 
populations had unlimited access to food and hence grew to larger sizes and 
reached asymptotic size more rapidly, enabling the analysis of age-dependent 
gene expression without the confounding effect of adult brain growth. We found 
that the majority of differentially expressed genes show the same direction of 
regulation in wild and captive populations. However, a number of genes were 
regulated in opposite direction. Genes downregulated in the wild and upregulated 
in captivity were enriched for terms related to neuronal communication. Genes 
upregulated in the wild and downregulated in captive conditions were enriched in 
terms related to DNA replication. Finally, the rate of age-dependent gene 
regulation was higher in wild animals, suggesting a phenomenon of accelerated 
aging.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac219
PMCID: PMC9641980
PMID: 36318827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac235. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac235.

Genomic Analyses Reveal Association of ASIP with a Recurrently evolving Adaptive 
Color Pattern in Frogs.

Goutte S(1), Hariyani I(1), Utzinger KD(1), Bourgeois Y(2), Boissinot S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Science, New York University Abu Dhabi, Saadiyat Island, Abu 
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, United 
Kingdom.

Traits shared among distantly related lineages are indicators of common 
evolutionary constraints, at the ecological, physiological, or molecular level. 
Here, we show that the vertebral stripe, a cryptic color pattern, has evolved 
hundreds of times in the evolutionary history of anurans (frogs and toads) and 
is favored in terrestrial habitats. Using a genome-wide association study, we 
demonstrate that variation near the Agouti signaling protein gene (ASIP) is 
responsible for the different vertebral stripe phenotypes in the African grass 
frog Ptychadena robeensis. RNAseq and real-time quantitative PCR revealed that 
differential expression of the gene and an adjacent long non-coding RNA is 
linked to patterning in this species. Surprisingly, and although the stripe 
phenotypes are shared with closely related species, we found that the P. 
robeensis alleles are private to the species and unlikely to evolve under 
long-term balancing selection, thus indicating that the vertebral stripe 
phenotypes result from parallel evolution within the group. Our findings 
demonstrate that this cryptic color pattern evolved rapidly and recurrently in 
terrestrial anurans, and therefore constitutes an ideal system to study repeated 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac235
PMCID: PMC9667977
PMID: 36317199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac237. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac237.

Inference of Gene Flow between Species under Misspecified Models.

Huang J(1), Thawornwattana Y(2), Flouri T(3), Mallet J(2), Yang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, 
P.R. China.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA 02138.
(3)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.

Genomic sequence data provide a rich source of information about the history of 
species divergence and interspecific hybridization or introgression. Despite 
recent advances in genomics and statistical methods, it remains challenging to 
infer gene flow, and as a result, one may have to estimate introgression rates 
and times under misspecified models. Here we use mathematical analysis and 
computer simulation to examine estimation bias and issues of interpretation when 
the model of gene flow is misspecified in analysis of genomic datasets, for 
example, if introgression is assigned to the wrong lineages. In the case of two 
species, we establish a correspondence between the migration rate in the 
continuous migration model and the introgression probability in the 
introgression model. When gene flow occurs continuously through time but in the 
analysis is assumed to occur at a fixed time point, common evolutionary 
parameters such as species divergence times are surprisingly well estimated. 
However, the time of introgression tends to be estimated towards the recent end 
of the period of continuous gene flow. When introgression events are assigned 
incorrectly to the parental or daughter lineages, introgression times tend to 
collapse onto species divergence times, with introgression probabilities 
underestimated. Overall, our analyses suggest that the simple introgression 
model is useful for extracting information concerning between-specific gene flow 
and divergence even when the model may be misspecified. However, for reliable 
inference of gene flow it is important to include multiple samples per species, 
in particular, from hybridizing species.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac237
PMCID: PMC9729068
PMID: 36317198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac236. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac236.

Taming the Selection of Optimal Substitution Models in Phylogenomics by Site 
Subsampling and Upsampling.

Sharma S(1)(2), Kumar S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122.
(3)Center for Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.

The selection of the optimal substitution model of molecular evolution imposes a 
high computational burden for long sequence alignments in phylogenomics. We 
discovered that the analysis of multiple tiny subsamples of site patterns from a 
full sequence alignment recovers the correct optimal substitution model when 
sites in the subsample are upsampled to match the total number of sites in the 
full alignment. The computational costs of maximum-likelihood analyses are 
reduced by orders of magnitude in the subsample-upsample (SU) approach because 
the upsampled alignment contains only a small fraction of all site patterns. We 
present an adaptive protocol, ModelTamer, that implements the new SU approach 
and automatically selects subsamples to estimate optimal models reliably. 
ModelTamer selects models hundreds to thousands of times faster than the full 
data analysis while needing megabytes rather than gigabytes of computer memory.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac236
PMCID: PMC9665063
PMID: 36306418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement. The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests.


427. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac233. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac233.

Genomic Signatures of Mitonuclear Coevolution in Mammals.

Weaver RJ(1)(2), Rabinowitz S(3), Thueson K(3), Havird JC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA.
(2)Department of Natural Resource Ecology and Management, Iowa State University, 
Ames, IA.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX.

Mitochondrial (mt) and nuclear-encoded proteins are integrated in aerobic 
respiration, requiring co-functionality among gene products from fundamentally 
different genomes. Different evolutionary rates, inheritance mechanisms, and 
selection pressures set the stage for incompatibilities between interacting 
products of the two genomes. The mitonuclear coevolution hypothesis posits that 
incompatibilities may be avoided if evolution in one genome selects for 
complementary changes in interacting genes encoded by the other genome. Nuclear 
compensation, in which deleterious mtDNA changes are offset by compensatory 
nuclear changes, is often invoked as the primary mechanism for mitonuclear 
coevolution. Yet, direct evidence supporting nuclear compensation is rare. Here, 
we used data from 58 mammalian species representing eight orders to show strong 
correlations between evolutionary rates of mt and nuclear-encoded mt-targeted 
(N-mt) proteins, but not between mt and non-mt-targeted nuclear proteins, 
providing strong support for mitonuclear coevolution across mammals. N-mt genes 
with direct mt interactions also showed the strongest correlations. Although 
most N-mt genes had elevated dN/dS ratios compared to mt genes (as predicted 
under nuclear compensation), N-mt sites in close contact with mt proteins were 
not overrepresented for signs of positive selection compared to noncontact N-mt 
sites (contrary to predictions of nuclear compensation). Furthermore, temporal 
patterns of N-mt and mt amino acid substitutions did not support predictions of 
nuclear compensation, even in positively selected, functionally important 
residues with direct mitonuclear contacts. Overall, our results strongly support 
mitonuclear coevolution across ∼170 million years of mammalian evolution but 
fail to support nuclear compensation as the major mode of mitonuclear 
coevolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac233
PMCID: PMC9641969
PMID: 36288802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Jan 4;40(1):msac232. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac232.

Prokaryotic Pangenomes Act as Evolving Ecosystems.

McInerney JO(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, The University of Nottingham, University Park, 
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Understanding adaptation to the local environment is a central tenet and a major 
focus of evolutionary biology. But this is only part of the adaptionist story. 
In addition to the external environment, one of the main drivers of genome 
composition is genetic background. In this perspective, I argue that there is a 
growing body of evidence that intra-genomic selective pressures play a 
significant part in the composition of prokaryotic genomes and play a 
significant role in the origin, maintenance and structuring of prokaryotic 
pangenomes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac232
PMCID: PMC9851318
PMID: 36288801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac230. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac230.

Functional Attenuation of UCP1 as the Potential Mechanism for a Thickened 
Blubber Layer in Cetaceans.

Zhou M(1), Wu T(1), Chen Y(1), Xu S(1), Yang G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Biotechnology, College of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) is an essential protein in the mitochondrial inner 
membrane that mediates nonshivering thermogenesis (NST) and plays an important 
role in thermoregulation and fat deposition. However, the relationship between 
the evolution of UCP1 and fat deposition in the blubber layer in cetaceans 
remains unclear. Here, frameshift mutations, premature termination, and relaxed 
selection pressure (ω = 0.9557, P < 0.05) were detected in UCP1 in cetaceans, 
suggesting that UCP1 was inactivated during cetacean evolution. By time 
estimation, it was found that the inactivation of UCP1 in cetaceans occurred 
between 53.1 and 50.2 Ma. However, combined with findings from 
immunohistochemical analysis of the blubber layer of the Yangtze finless 
porpoise and in vitro functional assays, a premature termination of cetacean 
UCP1 resulted in a reduction of UCP1-mediated NST capacity (about 50%) and 
lipolytic capacity (about 40%), both of which were beneficial to maintain 
blubber layer and body temperature without excessive fat consumption. This study 
provides new insights into the molecular mechanisms of the blubber thickening in 
cetaceans and highlights the importance of UCP1 attenuation in cetaceans for 
secondary aquatic adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac230
PMCID: PMC9648559
PMID: 36288798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac231. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac231.

An Approximate Bayesian Computation Approach for Modeling Genome Rearrangements.

Moshe A(1), Wygoda E(1), Ecker N(1), Loewenthal G(1), Avram O(1), Israeli O(1), 
Hazkani-Covo E(2), Pe'er I(3), Pupko T(1).

Author information:
(1)The Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research, George S. Wise Faculty 
of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.
(2)Department of Natural and Life Sciences, Open University of Israel, Ra'anana, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, USA.

The inference of genome rearrangement events has been extensively studied, as 
they play a major role in molecular evolution. However, probabilistic 
evolutionary models that explicitly imitate the evolutionary dynamics of such 
events, as well as methods to infer model parameters, are yet to be fully 
utilized. Here, we developed a probabilistic approach to infer genome 
rearrangement rate parameters using an Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) 
framework. We developed two genome rearrangement models, a basic model, which 
accounts for genomic changes in gene order, and a more sophisticated one which 
also accounts for changes in chromosome number. We characterized the ABC 
inference accuracy using simulations and applied our methodology to both 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic empirical datasets. Knowledge of genome-rearrangement 
rates can help elucidate their role in evolution as well as help simulate 
genomes with evolutionary dynamics that reflect empirical genomes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac231
PMCID: PMC9692237
PMID: 36282896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac229. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac229.

Transcriptome-based Phylogeny of the Semi-aquatic Bugs (Hemiptera: Heteroptera: 
Gerromorpha) Reveals Patterns of Lineage Expansion in a Series of New Adaptive 
Zones.

Armisén D(1)(2), Viala S(1), Cordeiro IDRS(3), Crumière AJJ(1), Hendaoui E(1), 
Le Bouquin A(1)(4), Duchemin W(5), Santos E(1), Toubiana W(1), Vargas-Lowman 
A(1), Burguez Floriano CF(3), Polhemus DA(6), Wang YH(7), Rowe L(4), Moreira 
FFF(3), Khila A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, Université 
Claude Bernard Lyon1, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte 
de Recherche 5242, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 69007 Lyon, France.
(2)Evolutionary Biology, Department of Ecology and Genetics, Uppsala University, 
SE-752 36 Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Laboratório de Biodiversidade Entomológica, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação 
Oswaldo Cruz, RJ, 21040-900 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, M5S 
3B2 Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Center for Scientific Computing (sciCORE), University of Basel, 4056 Basel, 
Switzerland.
(6)Department of Natural Sciences, Bishop Museum, 1525 Bernice St., Honolulu 
96817, HI, USA.
(7)School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 135 Xingangxi Road, 
Guangzhou 510275, Guangdong, People's Republic ofChina.

Key innovations enable access to new adaptive zones and are often linked to 
increased species diversification. As such, innovations have attracted much 
attention, yet their concrete consequences on the subsequent evolutionary 
trajectory and diversification of the bearing lineages remain unclear. Water 
striders and relatives (Hemiptera: Heteroptera: Gerromorpha) represent a 
monophyletic lineage of insects that transitioned to live on the water-air 
interface and that diversified to occupy ponds, puddles, streams, mangroves and 
even oceans. This lineage offers an excellent model to study the patterns and 
processes underlying species diversification following the conquest of new 
adaptive zones. However, such studies require a reliable and comprehensive 
phylogeny of the infraorder. Based on whole transcriptomic datasets of 97 
species and fossil records, we reconstructed a new phylogeny of the Gerromorpha 
that resolved inconsistencies and uncovered strong support for previously 
unknown relationships between some important taxa. We then used this phylogeny 
to reconstruct the ancestral state of a set of adaptations associated with water 
surface invasion (fluid locomotion, dispersal and transition to saline waters) 
and sexual dimorphism. Our results uncovered important patterns and dynamics of 
phenotypic evolution, revealing how the initial event of water surface invasion 
enabled multiple subsequent transitions to new adaptive zones on the water 
surfaces. This phylogeny and the associated transcriptomic datasets constitute 
highly valuable resources, making Gerromorpha an attractive model lineage to 
study phenotypic evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac229
PMCID: PMC9641996
PMID: 36269732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac228. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac228.

Compensatory Genetic and Transcriptional Cytonuclear Coordination in 
Allopolyploid Lager Yeast (Saccharomyces pastorianus).

Zhang K(1), Li J(1), Li G(1), Zhao Y(1), Dong Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Sun W(1), Wang 
J(1), Yao J(1), Ma Y(2), Wang H(3), Zhang Z(1), Wang T(1), Xie K(1), Wendel 
JF(4), Liu B(1), Gong L(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of the Ministry of Education (MOE), 
Northeast Normal University, Changchun, Jilin 130024, China.
(2)Jilin Academy of Vegetable and Flower Science, Changchun, Jilin 130033, 
China.
(3)Laboratory of Plant Epigenetics and Evolution, School of Life Science, 
Liaoning University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110036, China.
(4)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA 50010, USA.

Cytonuclear coordination between biparental-nuclear genomes and 
uniparental-cytoplasmic organellar genomes in plants is often resolved by 
genetic and transcriptional cytonuclear responses. Whether this mechanism also 
acts in allopolyploid members of other kingdoms is not clear. Additionally, 
cytonuclear coordination of interleaved allopolyploid cells/individuals within 
the same population is underexplored. The yeast Saccharomyces pastorianus 
provides the opportunity to explore cytonuclear coevolution during different 
growth stages and from novel dimensions. Using S. pastorianus cells from 
multiple growth stages in the same environment, we show that nuclear 
mitochondria-targeted genes have undergone both asymmetric gene conversion and 
growth stage-specific biased expression favoring genes from the mitochondrial 
genome donor (Saccharomyces eubayanus). Our results suggest that cytonuclear 
coordination in allopolyploid lager yeast species entails an orchestrated and 
compensatory genetic and transcriptional evolutionary regulatory shift. The 
common as well as unique properties of cytonuclear coordination underlying 
allopolyploidy between unicellular yeasts and higher plants offers novel 
insights into mechanisms of cytonuclear evolution associated with allopolyploid 
speciation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac228
PMCID: PMC9665066
PMID: 36260528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac226. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac226.

Early Nitrogenase Ancestors Encompassed Novel Active Site Diversity.

Schwartz SL(1)(2), Garcia AK(3), Kaçar B(3), Fournier GP(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Graduate Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA.
(2)Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
(3)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI.

Ancestral sequence reconstruction (ASR) infers predicted ancestral states for 
sites within sequences and can constrain the functions and properties of 
ancestors of extant protein families. Here, we compare the likely sequences of 
inferred nitrogenase ancestors to extant nitrogenase sequence diversity. We show 
that the most-likely combinations of ancestral states for key substrate channel 
residues are not represented in extant sequence space, and rarely found within a 
more broadly defined physiochemical space-supporting that the earliest ancestors 
of extant nitrogenases likely had alternative substrate channel composition. 
These differences may indicate differing environmental selection pressures 
acting on nitrogenase substrate specificity in ancient environments. These 
results highlight ASR's potential as an in silico tool for developing hypotheses 
about ancestral enzyme functions, as well as improving hypothesis testing 
through more targeted in vitro and in vivo experiments.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac226
PMCID: PMC9641968
PMID: 36260513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac227. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac227.

Evolution and Diversity of the TopoVI and TopoVI-like Subunits With Extensive 
Divergence of the TOPOVIBL subunit.

Brinkmeier J(1), Coelho S(2), de Massy B(1), Bourbon HM(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique Humaine (IGH), Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, Univ Montpellier, Montpellier 34396, France.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen 72076, Germany.
(3)Centre de Biologie Intégrative, CNRS, Université de Toulouse, Toulouse 31400, 
France.

Type II DNA topoisomerases regulate topology by double-stranded DNA cleavage and 
ligation. The TopoVI family of DNA topoisomerase, first identified and 
biochemically characterized in Archaea, represents, with TopoVIII and mini-A, 
the type IIB family. TopoVI has several intriguing features in terms of function 
and evolution. TopoVI has been identified in some eukaryotes, and a global view 
is lacking to understand its evolutionary pattern. In addition, in eukaryotes, 
the two TopoVI subunits (TopoVIA and TopoVIB) have been duplicated and have 
evolved to give rise to Spo11 and TopoVIBL, forming TopoVI-like (TopoVIL), a 
complex essential for generating DNA breaks that initiate homologous 
recombination during meiosis. TopoVIL is essential for sexual reproduction. How 
the TopoVI subunits have evolved to ensure this meiotic function is unclear. 
Here, we investigated the phylogenetic conservation of TopoVI and TopoVIL. We 
demonstrate that BIN4 and RHL1, potentially interacting with TopoVIB, have 
co-evolved with TopoVI. Based on model structures, this observation supports the 
hypothesis for a role of TopoVI in decatenation of replicated chromatids and 
predicts that in eukaryotes the TopoVI catalytic complex includes BIN4 and RHL1. 
For TopoVIL, the phylogenetic analysis of Spo11, which is highly conserved among 
Eukarya, highlighted a eukaryal-specific N-terminal domain that may be important 
for its regulation. Conversely, TopoVIBL was poorly conserved, giving rise to 
ATP hydrolysis-mutated or -truncated protein variants, or was undetected in some 
species. This remarkable plasticity of TopoVIBL provides important information 
for the activity and function of TopoVIL during meiosis.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac227
PMCID: PMC9665070
PMID: 36256608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac207. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac207.

Correction to: Unraveling the Genetic Basis for the Rapid Diversification of 
Male Genitalia between Drosophila Species.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):437-448.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac207
PMCID: PMC9577546
PMID: 36254688


436. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac225. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac225.

Widespread Gene Expression Divergence in Butterfly Sensory Tissues Plays a 
Fundamental Role During Reproductive Isolation and Speciation.

Wu N(1), Evans E(2), van Schooten B(2), Meléndez-Rosa J(2), Ortiz Y(2), Planas 
Soto-Navarro SM(2)(3), Van Belleghem SM(2)(4), Counterman BA(5), Papa R(2)(3), 
Zhang W(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life 
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras, San Juan 
00925, PR, USA.
(3)Molecular Sciences and Research Center, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan 
00907, PR, USA.
(4)Ecology, Evolution and Conservation Biology, Biology Department, KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.
(6)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People's Republic 
of China.

Neotropical Heliconius butterflies are well known for their intricate behaviors 
and multiple instances of incipient speciation. Chemosensing plays a fundamental 
role in the life history of these groups of butterflies and in the establishment 
of reproductive isolation. However, chemical communication involves synergistic 
sensory and accessory functions, and it remains challenging to investigate the 
molecular mechanisms underlying behavioral differences. Here, we examine the 
gene expression profiles and genomic divergence of three sensory tissues 
(antennae, legs, and mouthparts) between sexes (females and males) and life 
stages (different adult stages) in two hybridizing butterflies, Heliconius 
melpomene and Heliconius cydno. By integrating comparative transcriptomic and 
population genomic approaches, we found evidence of widespread gene expression 
divergence, supporting a crucial role of sensory tissues in the establishment of 
species barriers. We also show that sensory diversification increases in a 
manner consistent with evolutionary divergence based on comparison with the more 
distantly related species Heliconius charithonia. The findings of our study 
strongly support the unique chemosensory function of antennae in all three 
species, the importance of the Z chromosome in interspecific divergence, and the 
nonnegligible role of nonchemosensory genes in the divergence of chemosensory 
tissues. Collectively, our results provide a genome-wide illustration of 
diversification in the chemosensory system under incomplete reproductive 
isolation, revealing strong molecular separation in the early stage of 
speciation. Here, we provide a unique perspective and relevant view of the 
genetic architecture (sensory and accessory functions) of chemosensing beyond 
the classic chemosensory gene families, leading to a better understanding of the 
magnitude and complexity of molecular changes in sensory tissues that contribute 
to the establishment of reproductive isolation and speciation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac225
PMCID: PMC9641979
PMID: 36251882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac223. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac223.

Patterns of Population Structure and Introgression Among Recently Differentiated 
Drosophila melanogaster Populations.

Coughlan JM(1)(2), Dagilis AJ(1), Serrato-Capuchina A(3), Elias H(1), Peede 
D(4)(5), Isbell K(1), Castillo DM(6), Cooper BS(7), Matute DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(3)Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, Providence, 
RI, USA.
(5)Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown University, Providence, RI, 
USA.
(6)Institute of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of 
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA.
(7)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.

Despite a century of genetic analysis, the evolutionary processes that have 
generated the patterns of exceptional genetic and phenotypic variation in the 
model organism Drosophila melanogaster remains poorly understood. In particular, 
how genetic variation is partitioned within its putative ancestral range in 
Southern Africa remains unresolved. Here, we study patterns of population 
genetic structure, admixture, and the spatial structuring of candidate 
incompatibility alleles across a global sample, including 223 new accessions, 
predominantly from remote regions in Southern Africa. We identify nine major 
ancestries, six that primarily occur in Africa and one that has not been 
previously described. We find evidence for both contemporary and historical 
admixture between ancestries, with admixture rates varying both within and 
between continents. For example, while previous work has highlighted an 
admixture zone between broadly defined African and European ancestries in the 
Caribbean and southeastern USA, we identify West African ancestry as the most 
likely African contributor. Moreover, loci showing the strongest signal of 
introgression between West Africa and the Caribbean/southeastern USA include 
several genes relating to neurological development and male courtship behavior, 
in line with previous work showing shared mating behaviors between these 
regions. Finally, while we hypothesized that potential incompatibility loci may 
contribute to population genetic structure across the range of D. melanogaster; 
these loci are, on average, not highly differentiated between ancestries. This 
work contributes to our understanding of the evolutionary history of a key model 
system, and provides insight into the partitioning of diversity across its 
range.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac223
PMCID: PMC9641974
PMID: 36251862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac220. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac220.

The Role of the Environment in Horizontal Gene Transfer.

Acar Kirit H(1)(2)(3), Bollback JP(1), Lagator M(4).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, Institute of Infection, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, Merseyside, United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratories of Molecular Anthropology and Microbiome Research, University of 
Oklahoma, Norman, OK.
(3)Department of Anthropology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Gene-by-environment interactions play a crucial role in horizontal gene transfer 
by affecting how the transferred genes alter host fitness. However, how the 
environment modulates the fitness effect of transferred genes has not been 
tested systematically in an experimental study. We adapted a high-throughput 
technique for obtaining very precise estimates of bacterial fitness, in order to 
measure the fitness effects of 44 orthologs transferred from Salmonella 
Typhimurium to Escherichia coli in six physiologically relevant environments. We 
found that the fitness effects of individual genes were highly dependent on the 
environment, while the distributions of fitness effects across genes were not, 
with all tested environments resulting in distributions of same shape and 
spread. Furthermore, the extent to which the fitness effects of a gene varied 
between environments depended on the average fitness effect of that gene across 
all environments, with nearly neutral and nearly lethal genes having more 
consistent fitness effects across all environments compared to deleterious 
genes. Put together, our results reveal the unpredictable nature of how 
environmental conditions impact the fitness effects of each individual gene. At 
the same time, distributions of fitness effects across environments exhibit 
consistent features, pointing to the generalizability of factors that shape 
horizontal gene transfer of orthologous genes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac220
PMCID: PMC9641970
PMID: 36227733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac222. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac222.

Emergence of Novel RNA-Editing Sites by Changes in the Binding Affinity of a 
Conserved PPR Protein.

Loiacono FV(1), Walther D(1), Seeger S(1), Thiele W(1), Gerlach I(1), Karcher 
D(1), Schöttler MA(1), Zoschke R(1), Bock R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organelle Biology, Biotechnology and Molecular Ecophysiology, 
Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Pflanzenphysiologie, Am Mühlenberg 1, D-14476 
Potsdam-Golm, Germany.

RNA editing converts cytidines to uridines in plant organellar transcripts. 
Editing typically restores codons for conserved amino acids. During evolution, 
specific C-to-U editing sites can be lost from some plant lineages by genomic 
C-to-T mutations. By contrast, the emergence of novel editing sites is less well 
documented. Editing sites are recognized by pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) 
proteins with high specificity. RNA recognition by PPR proteins is partially 
predictable, but prediction is often inadequate for PPRs involved in RNA 
editing. Here we have characterized evolution and recognition of a recently 
gained editing site. We demonstrate that changes in the RNA recognition motifs 
that are not explainable with the current PPR code allow an ancient PPR protein, 
QED1, to uniquely target the ndhB-291 site in Brassicaceae. When expressed in 
tobacco, the Arabidopsis QED1 edits 33 high-confident off-target sites in 
chloroplasts and mitochondria causing a spectrum of mutant phenotypes. By 
manipulating the relative expression levels of QED1 and ndhB-291, we show that 
the target specificity of the PPR protein depends on the RNA:protein ratio. 
Finally, our data suggest that the low expression levels of PPR proteins are 
necessary to ensure the specificity of editing site selection and prevent 
deleterious off-target editing.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac222
PMCID: PMC9750133
PMID: 36227729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac221. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac221.

Ribosomal DNA Instability as a Potential Cause of Karyotype Evolution.

Li D(1)(2), Gandhi D(1)(2), Kumon T(1)(3), Yamashita YM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Karyotype refers to the configuration of the genome into a set of chromosomes. 
The karyotype difference between species is expected to impede various 
biological processes, such as chromosome segregation and meiotic chromosome 
pairing, potentially contributing to incompatibility. Karyotypes can rapidly 
change between closely related species and even among populations of the same 
species. However, the forces driving karyotype evolution are poorly understood. 
Here we describe a unique karyotype of a Drosophila melanogaster strain isolated 
from the Seychelles archipelago. This strain has lost the ribosomal DNA (rDNA) 
locus on the X chromosome. Because the Y chromosome is the only other 
rDNA-bearing chromosome, all females carry at least one Y chromosome as the 
source of rDNA. Interestingly, we found that the strain also carries a truncated 
Y chromosome (YS) that is stably maintained in the population despite its 
inability to support male fertility. Our modeling and cytological analysis 
suggest that the Y chromosome has a larger negative impact on female fitness 
than the YS chromosome. Moreover, we generated an independent strain that lacks 
X rDNA and has a karyotype of XXY females and XY males. This strain quickly 
evolved multiple karyotypes: two new truncated Y chromosomes (similar to YS), as 
well as two independent X chromosome fusions that contain the Y-derived rDNA 
fragment, eliminating females' dependence on the Y chromosome. Considering that 
Robertsonian fusions frequently occur at rDNA loci in humans, we propose that 
rDNA loci instability may be one of driving forces of karyotype evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac221
PMCID: PMC9641976
PMID: 36223491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac218. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac218.

Temperature-dependent Small RNA Expression Depends on Wild Genetic Backgrounds 
of Caenorhabditis briggsae.

Fusca DD(1), Sharma E(2), Weiss JG(1), Claycomb JM(2), Cutter AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON M5S3B2, Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G1M1, 
Canada.

Geographically distinct populations can adapt to the temperature conditions of 
their local environment, leading to temperature-dependent fitness differences 
between populations. Consistent with local adaptation, phylogeographically 
distinct Caenorhabditis briggsae nematodes show distinct fitness responses to 
temperature. The genetic mechanisms underlying local adaptation, however, remain 
unresolved. To investigate the potential role of small noncoding RNAs in 
genotype-specific responses to temperature, we quantified small RNA expression 
using high-throughput sequencing of C. briggsae nematodes from tropical and 
temperate strain genotypes reared under three temperature conditions (14 °C, 
20 °C, and 30 C). Strains representing both tropical and temperate regions 
showed significantly lower expression of PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) at high 
temperatures, primarily mapping to a large ∼7 Mb long piRNA cluster on 
chromosome IV. We also documented decreased expression of 22G-RNAs antisense to 
protein-coding genes and other genomic features at high rearing temperatures for 
the thermally-intolerant temperate strain genotype, but not for the tropical 
strain genotype. Reduced 22G-RNA expression was widespread along chromosomes and 
among feature types, indicative of a genome-wide response. Targets of the 
EGO-1/CSR-1 22G-RNA pathway were most strongly impacted compared with other 
22G-RNA pathways, implicating the CSR-1 Argonaute and its RNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase EGO-1 in the genotype-dependent modulation of C. briggsae 22G-RNAs 
under chronic thermal stress. Our work suggests that gene regulation via small 
RNAs may be an important contributor to the evolution of local adaptations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac218
PMCID: PMC9641977
PMID: 36223483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac224. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac224.

Miniature Inverted-repeat Transposable Elements Drive Rapid MicroRNA 
Diversification in Angiosperms.

Guo Z(1)(2), Kuang Z(3), Tao Y(1), Wang H(4), Wan M(1), Hao C(1), Shen F(5), 
Yang X(5), Li L(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Advanced 
Agricultural Sciences and School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 
100871, China.
(2)Co-Innovation Center for Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, College of 
Biology and the Environment, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing 210037, China.
(3)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced 
Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650223, China.
(5)Beijing Agro-biotechnology Research Center, Beijing Academy of Agriculture 
and Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100097, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are fast evolving endogenous small RNAs that regulate 
organism function and behavior in both animals and plants. Although models for 
de novo miRNA biogenesis have been proposed, the genomic mechanisms driving 
swift diversification of the miRNA repertoires in plants remain elusive. Here, 
by comprehensively analyzing 21 phylogenetically representative plant species, 
ranging from green algae to angiosperms, we systematically identified de novo 
miRNA events associated with 8,649 miRNA loci. We found that 399 (4.6%), 466 
(5.4%), and 1,402 (16.2%) miRNAs were derived from inverted gene duplication 
events, long terminal repeats of retrotransposons, and miniature inverted-repeat 
transposable elements (MITEs), respectively. Among the miRNAs of these origins, 
MITEs, especially those belonging to the Mutator, Tc1/Mariner, and PIF/Harbinger 
superfamilies, were the predominant genomic source for de novo miRNAs in the 15 
examined angiosperms but not in the six non-angiosperms. Our data further 
illustrated a transposition-transcription process by which MITEs are converted 
into new miRNAs (termed MITE-miRNAs) whereby properly sized MITEs are 
transcribed and therefore become potential substrates for the miRNA processing 
machinery by transposing into introns of active genes. By analyzing the 58,038 
putative target genes for the 8,095 miRNAs, we found that the target genes of 
MITE-miRNAs were preferentially associated with response to environmental 
stimuli such as temperature, suggesting that MITE-miRNAs are pertinent to plant 
adaptation. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that molecular conversion 
of MITEs is a genomic mechanism leading to rapid and continuous changes to the 
miRNA repertoires in angiosperm.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac224
PMCID: PMC9641971
PMID: 36223453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 11;39(10):msac201. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac201. Online 
ahead of print.

Evolutionary responses of a reef-building coral to climate change at the end of 
the last glacial maximum.

Zhang J(1)(2)(3), Richards ZT(4)(5), Adam AAS(4), Chan CX(6), Shinzato C(7), 
Gilmour J(8), Thomas L(8)(9), Strugnell JM(10)(11), Miller DJ(1)(2)(3)(12), 
Cooke I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, James Cook University, Townsville, 
QLD, 4811, Australia.
(2)Centre for Tropical Bioinformatics and Molecular Biology, James Cook 
University, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia.
(3)ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, James Cook University, 
Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia.
(4)Coral Conservation and Research Group, Trace and Environmental DNA 
Laboratory, School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curtin University, Bentley, 
WA 6102, Australia.
(5)Collections and Research, Western Australian Museum, 49 Kew Street Welshpool, 
WA 6106.
(6)The University of Queensland, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, 
Australian Centre for Ecogenomics, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.
(7)Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Chiba, 
Japan.
(8)Australia Institute of Marine Science, Indian Oceans Marine Research Centre, 
Crawley, WA, 6009, Australia.
(9)Oceans Graduate School, The UWA Oceans Institute, The University of Western 
Australia, Perth, WA, 6009, Australia.
(10)Department of Marine Biology and Aquaculture, James Cook University, 
Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia.
(11)Centre for Sustainable Fisheries and Aquaculture, James Cook University, 
Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia.
(12)Marine Climate Change Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, 
Onna-son, Okinawa, Japan 904-0495.

Climate change threatens the survival of coral reefs on a global scale, 
primarily through mass bleaching and mortality as a result of marine heatwaves. 
While these short-term effects are clear, predicting the fate of coral reefs 
over the coming century is a major challenge. One way to understand the 
longer-term effects of rapid climate change is to examine the response of coral 
populations to past climate shifts. Coastal and shallow-water marine ecosystems 
such as coral reefs have been reshaped many times by sea-level changes during 
the Pleistocene, yet, few studies have directly linked this with its 
consequences on population demographics, dispersal, and adaptation. Here we use 
powerful analytical techniques, afforded by haplotype phased whole-genomes, to 
establish such links for the reef-building coral, Acropora digitifera. We show 
that three genetically distinct populations are present in northwestern 
Australia, and that their rapid divergence since the last glacial maximum (LGM) 
can be explained by a combination of founder-effects and restricted gene flow. 
Signatures of selective sweeps, too strong to be explained by demographic 
history, are present in all three populations and overlap with genes that show 
different patterns of functional enrichment between inshore and offshore 
habitats. In contrast to rapid divergence in the host, we find that 
photosymbiont communities are largely undifferentiated between corals from all 
three locations, spanning almost 1000 km, indicating that selection on host 
genes and not acquisition of novel symbionts, has been the primary driver of 
adaptation for this species in northwestern Australia.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac201
PMCID: PMC9578555
PMID: 36219871


444. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 11;39(10):msac208. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac208. Online 
ahead of print.

Sequence divergence and retrotransposon insertion underlie interspecific 
epigenetic differences in primates.

Hirata M(1), Ichiyanagi T(1), Katoh H(1), Hashimoto T(1), Suzuki H(1), Nitta 
H(1), Kawase M(1), Nakai R(2), Imamura M(2), Ichiyanagi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genome and Epigenome Dynamics, Department of Animal Sciences, 
Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, 
Japan.
(2)Molecular Biology Section, Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, 
Center for the Evolutionary Origins of Human Behavior, Kyoto University, 
Inuyama, Aichi 484-8506, Japan.

Changes in the epigenome can affect the phenotype without the presence of 
changes in the genomic sequence. Given the high identity of the human and 
chimpanzee genome sequences, a substantial portion of their phenotypic 
divergence likely arises from epigenomic differences between the two species. In 
this study, the transcriptome and epigenome were determined for induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) generated from human and chimpanzee individuals. 
The transcriptome and epigenomes for trimethylated histone H3 at lysine-4 
(H3K4me3) and lysine-27 (H3K27me3) showed high levels of similarity between the 
two species. However, there were some differences in histone modifications. 
Although such regions, in general, did not show significant enrichment of 
interspecies nucleotide variations, gains in binding motifs for 
pluripotency-related transcription factors, especially POU5F1 and SOX2, were 
frequently found in species-specific H3K4me3 regions. We also revealed that 
species-specific insertions of retrotransposons, including the LTR5_Hs subfamily 
in human and a newly identified LTR5_Pt subfamily in chimpanzee, created 
species-specific H3K4me3 regions associated with increased expression of nearby 
genes. Human iPSCs have more species-specific H3K27me3 regions, resulting in 
more abundant bivalent domains. Only a limited number of these species-specific 
H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 regions overlap with species-biased enhancers in cranial 
neural crest cells, suggesting that differences in the epigenetic state of 
developmental enhancers appear late in development. Therefore, iPSCs serve as a 
suitable starting material for studying evolutionary changes in epigenome 
dynamics during development.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac208
PMCID: PMC9577543
PMID: 36219870


445. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac217. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac217.

General Theory of Specific Binding: Insights from a Genetic-Mechano-Chemical 
Protein Model.

McBride JM(1), Eckmann JP(2), Tlusty T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Soft and Living Matter, Institute for Basic Science, Ulsan 44919, 
South Korea.
(2)Département de Physique Théorique and Section de Mathématiques, University of 
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Departments of Physics and Chemistry, Ulsan National Institute of Science and 
Technology, Ulsan 44919, South Korea.

Proteins need to selectively interact with specific targets among a multitude of 
similar molecules in the cell. However, despite a firm physical understanding of 
binding interactions, we lack a general theory of how proteins evolve high 
specificity. Here, we present such a model that combines chemistry, mechanics, 
and genetics and explains how their interplay governs the evolution of specific 
protein-ligand interactions. The model shows that there are many routes to 
achieving molecular discrimination-by varying degrees of flexibility and 
shape/chemistry complementarity-but the key ingredient is precision. Harder 
discrimination tasks require more collective and precise coaction of structure, 
forces, and movements. Proteins can achieve this through correlated mutations 
extending far from a binding site, which fine-tune the localized interaction 
with the ligand. Thus, the solution of more complicated tasks is enabled by 
increasing the protein size, and proteins become more evolvable and robust when 
they are larger than the bare minimum required for discrimination. The model 
makes testable, specific predictions about the role of flexibility and shape 
mismatch in discrimination, and how evolution can independently tune affinity 
and specificity. Thus, the proposed theory of specific binding addresses the 
natural question of "why are proteins so big?". A possible answer is that 
molecular discrimination is often a hard task best performed by adding more 
layers to the protein.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac217
PMCID: PMC9641994
PMID: 36208205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac175. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac175.

A Novel Gene Controls a New Structure: PiggyBac Transposable Element-Derived 1, 
Unique to Mammals, Controls Mammal-Specific Neuronal Paraspeckles.

Raskó T(1), Pande A(1), Radscheit K(1), Zink A(2), Singh M(1), Sommer C(1), 
Wachtl G(3)(4), Kolacsek O(3), Inak G(2), Szvetnik A(1), Petrakis S(5), Bunse 
M(1), Bansal V(6), Selbach M(1), Orbán TI(3), Prigione A(2), Hurst LD(7), Izsvák 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Society, Berlin, 
Germany.
(2)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, 
Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(3)Institute of Enzymology, Research Centre for Natural Sciences, ELKH, 
Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Doctoral School of Biology, Institute of Biology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Institute of Applied Biosciences/Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, 
57001 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(6)Biomedical Data Science and Machine Learning Group, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tübingen 72076, Germany.
(7)Milner Centre for Evolution, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, 
University of Bath, Bath, UK.

Although new genes can arrive from modes other than duplication, few examples 
are well characterized. Given high expression in some human brain subregions and 
a putative link to psychological disorders [e.g., schizophrenia (SCZ)], 
suggestive of brain functionality, here we characterize piggyBac transposable 
element-derived 1 (PGBD1). PGBD1 is nonmonotreme mammal-specific and under 
purifying selection, consistent with functionality. The gene body of human PGBD1 
retains much of the original DNA transposon but has additionally captured SCAN 
and KRAB domains. Despite gene body retention, PGBD1 has lost transposition 
abilities, thus transposase functionality is absent. PGBD1 no longer recognizes 
piggyBac transposon-like inverted repeats, nonetheless PGBD1 has DNA binding 
activity. Genome scale analysis identifies enrichment of binding sites in and 
around genes involved in neuronal development, with association with both 
histone activating and repressing marks. We focus on one of the repressed genes, 
the long noncoding RNA NEAT1, also dysregulated in SCZ, the core structural RNA 
of paraspeckles. DNA binding assays confirm specific binding of PGBD1 both in 
the NEAT1 promoter and in the gene body. Depletion of PGBD1 in neuronal 
progenitor cells (NPCs) results in increased NEAT1/paraspeckles and 
differentiation. We conclude that PGBD1 has evolved core regulatory 
functionality for the maintenance of NPCs. As paraspeckles are a mammal-specific 
structure, the results presented here show a rare example of the evolution of a 
novel gene coupled to the evolution of a contemporaneous new structure.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac175
PMCID: PMC9538788
PMID: 36205081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac214. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac214.

Loss of Heterozygosity Spectrum Depends on Ploidy Level in Natural Yeast 
Populations.

Dutta A(1), Dutreux F(1), Schacherer J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, GMGM UMR 7156, Strasbourg 67000, France.
(2)Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris 75005, France.

The appearance of genomic variations such as loss of heterozygosity (LOH) has a 
significant impact on phenotypic diversity observed in a population. Recent 
large-scale yeast population genomic surveys have shown a high frequency of 
these events in natural isolates and more particularly in polyploids. However, 
the frequency, extent, and spectrum of LOH in polyploid organisms have never 
been explored and are poorly characterized to date. Here, we accumulated 5,163 
LOH events over 1,875 generations in 76 mutation accumulation (MA) lines 
comprising nine natural heterozygous diploid, triploid, and tetraploid natural 
S. cerevisiae isolates from different ecological and geographical origins. We 
found that the rate and spectrum of LOH are variable across ploidy levels. Of 
the total accumulated LOH events, 8.5%, 21%, and 70.5% of them were found in 
diploid, triploid, and tetraploid MA lines, respectively. Our results clearly 
show that the frequency of generated LOH events increases with ploidy level. In 
fact, the cumulative LOH rates were estimated to be 9.3 × 10-3, 2.2 × 10-2, and 
8.4 × 10-2 events per division for diploids, triploids, and tetraploids, 
respectively. In addition, a clear bias toward the accumulation of interstitial 
and short LOH tracts is observed in triploids and tetraploids compared with 
diploids. The variation of the frequency and spectrum of LOH events across 
ploidy level could be related to the genomic instability, characterizing higher 
ploidy isolates.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac214
PMCID: PMC9641995
PMID: 36205042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac216. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac216.

Mode and Tempo of 3D Genome Evolution in Drosophila.

Torosin NS(1), Golla TR(2), Lawlor MA(1), Cao W(1), Ellison CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(2)LifeCell, Kelambakkam Main Road, Keelakottaiyur, Chennai 600127, Tamil Nadu, 
India.

Topologically associating domains (TADs) are thought to play an important role 
in preventing gene misexpression by spatially constraining enhancer-promoter 
contacts. The deleterious nature of gene misexpression implies that TADs should, 
therefore, be conserved among related species. Several early studies comparing 
chromosome conformation between species reported high levels of TAD 
conservation; however, more recent studies have questioned these results. 
Furthermore, recent work suggests that TAD reorganization is not associated with 
extensive changes in gene expression. Here, we investigate the evolutionary 
conservation of TADs among 11 species of Drosophila. We use Hi-C data to 
identify TADs in each species and employ a comparative phylogenetic approach to 
derive empirical estimates of the rate of TAD evolution. Surprisingly, we find 
that TADs evolve rapidly. However, we also find that the rate of evolution 
depends on the chromatin state of the TAD, with TADs enriched for 
developmentally regulated chromatin evolving significantly slower than TADs 
enriched for broadly expressed, active chromatin. We also find that, after 
controlling for differences in chromatin state, highly conserved TADs do not 
exhibit higher levels of gene expression constraint. These results suggest that, 
in general, most TADs evolve rapidly and their divergence is not associated with 
widespread changes in gene expression. However, higher levels of evolutionary 
conservation and gene expression constraints in TADs enriched for 
developmentally regulated chromatin suggest that these TAD subtypes may be more 
important for regulating gene expression, likely due to the larger number of 
long-distance enhancer-promoter contacts associated with developmental genes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac216
PMCID: PMC9641997
PMID: 36201625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):msac215. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac215.

Weighting by Gene Tree Uncertainty Improves Accuracy of Quartet-based Species 
Trees.

Zhang C(1), Mirarab S(2).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UC San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.

Phylogenomic analyses routinely estimate species trees using methods that 
account for gene tree discordance. However, the most scalable species tree 
inference methods, which summarize independently inferred gene trees to obtain a 
species tree, are sensitive to hard-to-avoid errors introduced in the gene tree 
estimation step. This dilemma has created much debate on the merits of 
concatenation versus summary methods and practical obstacles to using summary 
methods more widely and to the exclusion of concatenation. The most successful 
attempt at making summary methods resilient to noisy gene trees has been 
contracting low support branches from the gene trees. Unfortunately, this 
approach requires arbitrary thresholds and poses new challenges. Here, we 
introduce threshold-free weighting schemes for the quartet-based species tree 
inference, the metric used in the popular method ASTRAL. By reducing the impact 
of quartets with low support or long terminal branches (or both), weighting 
provides stronger theoretical guarantees and better empirical performance than 
the unweighted ASTRAL. Our simulations show that weighting improves accuracy 
across many conditions and reduces the gap with concatenation in conditions with 
low gene tree discordance and high noise. On empirical data, weighting improves 
congruence with concatenation and increases support. Together, our results show 
that weighting, enabled by a new optimization algorithm we introduce, improves 
the utility of summary methods and can reduce the incongruence often observed 
across analytical pipelines.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac215
PMCID: PMC9750496
PMID: 36201617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac213. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac213.

An Ancient Respiratory System in the Widespread Sedimentary Archaea 
Thermoprofundales.

Zhang X(1)(2), Huang Y(1)(2), Liu Y(1)(2), Xu W(3), Pan J(1)(2), Zheng X(4), Du 
H(1)(2), Zhang C(1)(2), Lu Z(1)(2), Zou D(1)(2), Liu Z(1)(2), Cai M(5), Xiong 
J(6), Zhu Y(4), Dong Z(4), Jiang H(7), Dong H(8), Jiang J(9), Luo Z(3), Huang 
L(4), Li M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Archaeal Biology Center, Institute for Advanced Study, Shenzhen University, 
Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(2)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Microbiome Engineering, Institute for 
Advanced Study, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Marine Biogenetic Resources, Third Institute of 
Oceanography, Ministry of Natural Resources, Xiamen, Fujian, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)Institute of Chemical Biology, Shenzhen Bay Laboratory, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
China.
(6)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Biogeology and Environmental Geology, China 
University of Geosciences, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Biogeology and Environmental Geology, China 
University of Geosciences, Beijing, China.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences, 
Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.

Thermoprofundales, formerly Marine Benthic Group D (MBG-D), is a ubiquitous 
archaeal lineage found in sedimentary environments worldwide. However, its 
taxonomic classification, metabolic pathways, and evolutionary history are 
largely unexplored because of its uncultivability and limited number of 
sequenced genomes. In this study, phylogenomic analysis and average amino acid 
identity values of a collection of 146 Thermoprofundales genomes revealed five 
Thermoprofundales subgroups (A-E) with distinct habitat preferences. Most of the 
microorganisms from Subgroups B and D were thermophiles inhabiting hydrothermal 
vents and hot spring sediments, whereas those from Subgroup E were adapted to 
surface environments where sunlight is available. H2 production may be featured 
in Thermoprofundales as evidenced by a gene cluster encoding the ancient 
membrane-bound hydrogenase (MBH) complex. Interestingly, a unique structure 
separating the MBH gene cluster into two modular units was observed exclusively 
in the genomes of Subgroup E, which included a peripheral arm encoding the 
[NiFe] hydrogenase domain and a membrane arm encoding the Na+/H+ antiporter 
domain. These two modular structures were confirmed to function independently by 
detecting the H2-evolving activity in vitro and salt tolerance to 0.2 M NaCl in 
vivo, respectively. The peripheral arm of Subgroup E resembles the proposed 
common ancestral respiratory complex of modern respiratory systems, which plays 
a key role in the early evolution of life. In addition, molecular dating 
analysis revealed that Thermoprofundales is an early emerging archaeal lineage 
among the extant MBH-containing microorganisms, indicating new insights into the 
evolution of this ubiquitous archaea lineage.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac213
PMCID: PMC9585477
PMID: 36181435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac211. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac211.

Molecular and Developmental Signatures of Genital Size Macro-Evolution in Bugs.

Genevcius BC(1), Calandriello DC(1), Torres TT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, University of Sao Paulo, Sao 
Paulo (SP), Brazil.

Our understanding of the genetic architecture of phenotypic traits has 
experienced drastic growth over the last years. Nevertheless, the majority of 
studies associating genotypes and phenotypes have been conducted at the 
ontogenetic level. Thus, we still have an elusive knowledge of how these 
genetic-developmental architectures evolve themselves and how their evolution is 
mirrored in the phenotypic change across evolutionary time. We tackle this gap 
by reconstructing the evolution of male genital size, one of the most complex 
traits in insects, together with its underlying genetic architecture. Using the 
order Hemiptera as a model, spanning over 350 million years of evolution, we 
estimate the correlation between genitalia and three features: development rate, 
body size, and rates of DNA substitution in 68 genes associated with genital 
development. We demonstrate that genital size macro-evolution has been largely 
dependent on body size and weakly influenced by development rate and 
phylogenetic history. We further revealed significant correlations between 
mutation rates and genital size for 19 genes. Interestingly, these genes have 
diverse functions and participate in distinct signaling pathways, suggesting 
that genital size is a complex trait whose fast evolution has been enabled by 
molecular changes associated with diverse morphogenetic processes. Our data 
further demonstrate that the majority of DNA evolution correlated with the 
genitalia has been shaped by negative selection or neutral evolution. Thus, in 
terms of sequence evolution, changes in genital size are predominantly 
facilitated by relaxation of constraints rather than positive selection, 
possibly due to the high pleiotropic nature of the morphogenetic genes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac211
PMCID: PMC9585474
PMID: 36181434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac212. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac212.

sstar: A Python Package for Detecting Archaic Introgression from Population 
Genetic Data with S.

Huang X(1)(2), Kruisz P(3), Kuhlwilm M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Vienna, Djerassiplatz 
1, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Human Evolution and Archaeological Sciences (HEAS), University of Vienna, 
Djerassiplatz 1, 1030 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Bio Data Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Applied 
Sciences Wiener Neustadt, Biotech Campus Tulln, Konrad Lorenz-Straße 10, 3430 
Tulln, Austria.

S* is a widely used statistic for detecting archaic admixture from population 
genetic data. Previous studies used freezing-archer to apply S*, which is only 
directly applicable to the specific case of Neanderthal and Denisovan 
introgression in Papuans. Here, we implemented sstar for a more general purpose. 
Compared with several tools, including SPrime, SkovHMM, and ArchaicSeeker2.0, 
for detecting introgressed fragments with simulations, our results suggest that 
sstar is robust to differences in demographic models, including ghost 
introgression and two-source introgression. We believe sstar will be a useful 
tool for detecting introgressed fragments in various scenarios and in non-human 
species.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac212
PMCID: PMC9677471
PMID: 36181428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac206. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac206.

Recurrent but Short-Lived Duplications of Centromeric Proteins in Holocentric 
Caenorhabditis Species.

Caro L(1)(2), Raman P(3), Steiner FA(4), Ailion M(1)(2), Malik HS(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(3)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 98109, 
USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Cellular Biology, Section of Biology, 
Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA 
98109, USA.

Centromeric histones (CenH3s) are essential for chromosome inheritance during 
cell division in most eukaryotes. CenH3 genes have rapidly evolved and undergone 
repeated gene duplications and diversification in many plant and animal species. 
In Caenorhabditis species, two independent duplications of CenH3 (named hcp-3 
for HoloCentric chromosome-binding Protein 3) were previously identified in C. 
elegans and C. remanei. Using phylogenomic analyses in 32 Caenorhabditis 
species, we find strict retention of the ancestral hcp-3 gene and 10 independent 
duplications. Most hcp-3L (hcp-3-like) paralogs are only found in 1-2 species, 
are expressed in both males and females/hermaphrodites, and encode histone fold 
domains with 69-100% identity to ancestral hcp-3. We identified novel N-terminal 
protein motifs, including putative kinetochore protein-interacting motifs and a 
potential separase cleavage site, which are well conserved across Caenorhabditis 
HCP-3 proteins. Other N-terminal motifs vary in their retention across paralogs 
or species, revealing potential subfunctionalization or functional loss 
following duplication. An N-terminal extension in the hcp-3L gene of C. afra 
revealed an unprecedented protein fusion, where hcp-3L fused to duplicated 
segments from hcp-4 (nematode CENP-C). By extending our analyses beyond CenH3, 
we found gene duplications of six inner and outer kinetochore genes in 
Caenorhabditis, which appear to have been retained independent of hcp-3 
duplications. Our findings suggest that centromeric protein duplications occur 
frequently in Caenorhabditis nematodes, are selectively retained for short 
evolutionary periods, then degenerate or are lost entirely. We hypothesize that 
unique challenges associated with holocentricity in Caenorhabditis may lead to 
this rapid "revolving door" of kinetochore protein paralogs.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac206
PMCID: PMC9577544
PMID: 36173809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac209. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac209.

Demographic and Selection Histories of Populations Across the Sahel/Savannah 
Belt.

Fortes-Lima C(1), Tříska P(2), Čížková M(2), Podgorná E(2), Diallo MY(2)(3), 
Schlebusch CM(1)(4)(5), Černý V(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Evolution, Department of Organismal Biology, Evolutionary Biology 
Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Archaeogenetics Laboratory, Institute of Archaeology of the Czech Academy of 
Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Science, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)Palaeo-Research Institute, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South 
Africa.
(5)SciLifeLab, Uppsala, Sweden.

The Sahel/Savannah belt harbors diverse populations with different demographic 
histories and different subsistence patterns. However, populations from this 
large African region are notably under-represented in genomic research. To 
investigate the population structure and adaptation history of populations from 
the Sahel/Savannah space, we generated dense genome-wide genotype data of 327 
individuals-comprising 14 ethnolinguistic groups, including 10 previously 
unsampled populations. Our results highlight fine-scale population structure and 
complex patterns of admixture, particularly in Fulani groups and Arabic-speaking 
populations. Among all studied Sahelian populations, only the Rashaayda 
Arabic-speaking population from eastern Sudan shows a lack of gene flow from 
African groups, which is consistent with the short history of this population in 
the African continent. They are recent migrants from Saudi Arabia with evidence 
of strong genetic isolation during the last few generations and a strong 
demographic bottleneck. This population also presents a strong selection signal 
in a genomic region around the CNR1 gene associated with substance dependence 
and chronic stress. In Western Sahelian populations, signatures of selection 
were detected in several other genetic regions, including pathways associated 
with lactase persistence, immune response, and malaria resistance. Taken 
together, these findings refine our current knowledge of genetic diversity, 
population structure, migration, admixture and adaptation of human populations 
in the Sahel/Savannah belt and contribute to our understanding of human history 
and health.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac209
PMCID: PMC9582163
PMID: 36173804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac210. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac210.

Tracing Bai-Yue Ancestry in Aboriginal Li People on Hainan Island.

Chen H(1), Lin R(2)(3), Lu Y(4)(5), Zhang R(1), Gao Y(5), He Y(6), Xu 
S(4)(5)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and 
Health, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)Department of Biology, Hainan Medical University, Haikou 571199, Hainan, 
China.
(3)Center of Forensic Medicine of Hainan Medical University, Hainan Provincial 
Academician Workstation (Tropical Forensic Medicine), Hainan Provincial Tropical 
Forensic Engineering Research Center, Haikou 571199, Hainan, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Center for Evolutionary Biology, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and Development, School of Life 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China.
(5)Human Phenome Institute, Zhangjiang Fudan International Innovation Center, 
and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 201203, China.
(6)Shanghai Fifth People's Hospital, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Medical 
Epigenetics, International Co-laboratory of Medical Epigenetics and Metabolism 
(Ministry of Science and Technology), Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(7)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming 650223, China.
(8)Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation Liver Cancer Institute, 
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(9)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Phylogenomics and Comparative Genomics, School of 
Life Sciences, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou 221116, China.

As the most prevalent aboriginal group on Hainan Island located between South 
China and the mainland of Southeast Asia, the Li people are believed to preserve 
some unique genetic information due to their isolated circumstances, although 
this has been largely uninvestigated. We performed the first whole-genome 
sequencing of 55 Hainan Li (HNL) individuals with high coverage (∼30-50×) to 
gain insight into their genetic history and potential adaptations. We identified 
the ancestry enriched in HNL (∼85%) is well preserved in present-day Tai-Kadai 
speakers residing in South China and North Vietnam, that is, Bai-Yue 
populations. A lack of admixture signature due to the geographical restriction 
exacerbated the bottleneck in the present-day HNL. The genetic divergence among 
Bai-Yue populations began ∼4,000-3,000 years ago when the proto-HNL underwent 
migration and the settling of Hainan Island. Finally, we identified signatures 
of positive selection in the HNL, some outstanding examples included FADS1 and 
FADS2 related to a diet rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids. In addition, we 
observed that malaria-driven selection had occurred in the HNL, with 
population-specific variants of malaria-related genes (e.g., CR1) present. 
Interestingly, HNL harbors a high prevalence of malaria leveraged gene variants 
related to hematopoietic function (e.g., CD3G) that may explain the high 
incidence of blood disorders such as B-cell lymphomas in the present-day HNL. 
The results have advanced our understanding of the genetic history of the 
Bai-Yue populations and have provided new insights into the adaptive scenarios 
of the Li people.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac210
PMCID: PMC9585476
PMID: 36173765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac195. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac195.

A CLAVATA3-like Gene Acts as a Gynoecium Suppression Function in White Campion.

Kazama Y(1)(2), Kitoh M(1), Kobayashi T(1), Ishii K(2)(3), Krasovec M(4)(5), 
Yasui Y(6), Abe T(2), Kawano S(7)(8), Filatov DA(4).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Fukui Prefectural 
University, 4-1-1 Kenjojima, Matsuoka, Eiheiji-cho, Japan.
(2)RIKEN Nishina Center, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(3)National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology, 
4-9-1 Anagawa, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8555, Japan.
(4)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3RB, UK.
(5)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, UMR 7232 Biologie Intégrative des Organismes 
Marins (BIOM), Observatoire Océanologique, 66650 Banyuls-sur-Mer, France.
(6)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa Oiwake-cho, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.
(7)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, FSB-601, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 
277-8562, Japan.
(8)Future Center Initiative, The University of Tokyo, 178-4-4 Wakashiba, 
Kashiwa, Chiba 277-0871, Japan.

How do separate sexes originate and evolve? Plants provide many opportunities to 
address this question as they have diverse mating systems and separate sexes 
(dioecy) that evolved many times independently. The classic "two-factor" model 
for evolution of separate sexes proposes that males and females can evolve from 
hermaphrodites via the spread of male and female sterility mutations that turn 
hermaphrodites into females and males, respectively. This widely accepted model 
was inspired by early genetic work in dioecious white campion (Silene latifolia) 
that revealed the presence of two sex-determining factors on the Y-chromosome, 
though the actual genes remained unknown. Here, we report identification and 
functional analysis of the putative sex-determining gene in S. latifolia, 
corresponding to the gynoecium suppression factor (GSF). We demonstrate that GSF 
likely corresponds to a Y-linked CLV3-like gene that is specifically expressed 
in early male flower buds and encodes the protein that suppresses gynoecium 
development in S. latifolia. Interestingly, GSFY has a dysfunctional X-linked 
homolog (GSFX) and their synonymous divergence (dS = 17.9%) is consistent with 
the age of sex chromosomes in this species. We propose that female development 
in S. latifolia is controlled via the WUSCHEL-CLAVATA feedback loop, with the 
X-linked WUSCHEL-like and Y-linked CLV3-like genes, respectively. Evolution of 
dioecy in the S. latifolia ancestor likely involved inclusion of ancestral GSFY 
into the nonrecombining region on the nascent Y-chromosome and GSFX loss of 
function, which resulted in disbalance of the WUSCHEL-CLAVATA feedback loop 
between the sexes and ensured gynoecium suppression in males.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac195
PMCID: PMC9550985
PMID: 36166820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):msac205. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac205.

Coemergence of the Amphipathic Helix on Ameloblastin With Mammalian Prismatic 
Enamel.

Su J(1), Bapat RA(1), Visakan G(1), Moradian-Oldak J(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles 90033, CA, USA.

To investigate correlation between the ameloblastin (Ambn) amino acid sequence 
and the emergence of prismatic enamel, a notable event in the evolution of 
ectodermal hard tissues, we analyzed Ambn sequences of 53 species for which 
enamel microstructures have been previously reported. We found that a potential 
amphipathic helix (AH) within the sequence encoded by Exon 5 of Ambn appeared in 
species with prismatic enamel, with a few exceptions. We studied this 
correlation by investigating synthetic peptides from different species. A blue 
shift in fluorescence spectroscopy suggested that the peptides derived from 
mammalian Ambn interacted with liposomes. A downward shift at 222 nm in circular 
dichroism spectroscopy of the peptides in the presence of liposomes suggested 
that the peptides of mammals with prismatic enamel underwent a transition from 
disordered to helical structure. The peptides of species without prismatic 
enamel did not show similar secondary structural changes in the presence of 
liposomes. Peptides of mammals with prismatic enamel caused liposome leakage and 
inhibited LS8 and ALC cell spreading regulated by full-length Ambn. RT-PCR 
showed that AH is involved in Ambn's regulation of cell polarization genes: 
Vangl2, Vangl1, Prickle1, ROCK1, ROCK2, and Par3. Our comprehensive sequence 
analysis clearly demonstrates that AH motif is closely related to the emergence 
of enamel prismatic structure, providing insight into the evolution of complex 
enamel microstructure. We speculate that the AH motif evolved in mammals to 
interact with cell membrane, triggering signaling pathways required for specific 
changes in cell morphology associated with the formation of enamel prismatic 
structure.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac205
PMCID: PMC9631975
PMID: 36161489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac204. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac204.

tidy tree: A New Layout for Phylogenetic Trees.

Penel S(1), de Vienne DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Univ Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie 
Évolutive UMR5558, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France.

Many layouts exist for visualizing phylogenetic trees, allowing to display the 
same information (evolutionary relationships) in different ways. For large 
phylogenies, the choice of the layout is a key element, because the printable 
area is limited, and because interactive on-screen visualizers can lead to 
unreadable phylogenetic relationships at high zoom levels. A visual inspection 
of available layouts for rooted trees reveals large empty areas that one may 
want to fill in order to use less drawing space and eventually gain readability. 
This can be achieved by using the nonlayered tidy tree layout algorithm that was 
proposed earlier but was never used in a phylogenetic context so far. Here, we 
present its implementation, and we demonstrate its advantages on simulated and 
biological data (the measles virus phylogeny). Our results call for the 
integration of this new layout in phylogenetic software. We implemented the 
nonlayered tidy tree layout in R language as a stand-alone function (available 
at https://github.com/damiendevienne/non-layered-tidy-trees), as an option in 
the tree plotting function of the R package ape, and in the recent tool for 
visualizing reconciled phylogenetic trees thirdkind 
(https://github.com/simonpenel/thirdkind/wiki).

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac204
PMCID: PMC9550987
PMID: 36161327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac203. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac203.

A Pleiotropic Flowering Time QTL Exhibits Gene-by-Environment Interaction for 
Fitness in a Perennial Grass.

Weng X(1), Haque T(1), Zhang L(1), Razzaque S(1), Lovell JT(2), Palacio-Mejía 
JD(3), Duberney P(4), Lloyd-Reilley J(4), Bonnette J(1), Juenger TE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 
USA.
(2)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, USA.
(3)Corporación Colombiana de Investigación Agropecuaria - AGROSAVIA, Centro de 
Investigación Tibaitatá. Kilómetro 14 vía Mosquera-Bogotá, Mosquera. Código 
postal 250047, Colombia.
(4)Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center, USDA-NRCS, Kingsville, TX, USA.

Appropriate flowering time is a crucial adaptation impacting fitness in natural 
plant populations. Although the genetic basis of flowering variation has been 
extensively studied, its mechanisms in nonmodel organisms and its adaptive value 
in the field are still poorly understood. Here, we report new insights into the 
genetic basis of flowering time and its effect on fitness in Panicum hallii, a 
native perennial grass. Genetic mapping in populations derived from inland and 
coastal ecotypes identified flowering time quantitative trait loci (QTL) and 
many exhibited extensive QTL-by-environment interactions. Patterns of 
segregation within recombinant hybrids provide strong support for directional 
selection driving ecotypic divergence in flowering time. A major QTL on 
chromosome 5 (q-FT5) was detected in all experiments. Fine-mapping and 
expression studies identified a gene with orthology to a rice FLOWERING LOCUS 
T-like 9 (PhFTL9) as the candidate underlying q-FT5. We used a reciprocal 
transplant experiment to test for local adaptation and the specific impact of 
q-FT5 on performance. We did not observe local adaptation in terms of fitness 
tradeoffs when contrasting ecotypes in home versus away habitats. However, we 
observed that the coastal allele of q-FT5 conferred a fitness advantage only in 
its local habitat but not at the inland site. Sequence analyses identified an 
excess of low-frequency polymorphisms at the PhFTL9 promoter in the inland 
lineage, suggesting a role for either selection or population expansion on 
promoter evolution. Together, our findings demonstrate the genetic basis of 
flowering variation in a perennial grass and provide evidence for conditional 
neutrality underlying flowering time divergence.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac203
PMCID: PMC9550986
PMID: 36149808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac194. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac194.

Slow Protein Dynamics Elicits New Enzymatic Functions by Means of Epistatic 
Interactions.

Rossi MA(1), Palzkill T(2)(3), Almeida FCL(4), Vila AJ(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR, CONICET-UNR), 
Ocampo and Esmeralda, Rosario, Argentina.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, USA.
(3)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA.
(4)Institute of Medical Biochemistry Leopoldo de Meis (IBqM) and National Center 
for Structural Biology and Bioimaging (CENABIO), Federal University of Rio de 
Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, Universidad Nacional de 
Rosario, Rosario, Argentina.

Protein evolution depends on the adaptation of these molecules to different 
functional challenges. This occurs by tuning their biochemical, biophysical, and 
structural traits through the accumulation of mutations. While the role of 
protein dynamics in biochemistry is well recognized, there are limited examples 
providing experimental evidence of the optimization of protein dynamics during 
evolution. Here we report an NMR study of four variants of the CTX-M 
β-lactamases, in which the interplay of two mutations outside the active site 
enhances the activity against a cephalosporin substrate, ceftazidime. The 
crystal structures of these enzymes do not account for this activity 
enhancement. By using NMR, here we show that the combination of these two 
mutations increases the backbone dynamics in a slow timescale and the exposure 
to the solvent of an otherwise buried β-sheet. The two mutations located in this 
β-sheet trigger conformational changes in loops located at the opposite side of 
the active site. We postulate that the most active variant explores alternative 
conformations that enable binding of the more challenging substrate ceftazidime. 
The impact of the mutations in the dynamics is context-dependent, in line with 
the epistatic effect observed in the catalytic activity of the different 
variants. These results reveal the existence of a dynamic network in CTX-M 
β-lactamases that has been exploited in evolution to provide a net 
gain-of-function, highlighting the role of alternative conformations in protein 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac194
PMCID: PMC9547502
PMID: 36136729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac200. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac200.

The Genomic Landscapes of Desert Birds Form over Multiple Time Scales.

Provost K(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Shue SY(4)(5), Forcellati M(4)(6), Smith BT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ornithology, American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY, 
USA.
(2)Richard Gilder Graduate School, American Museum of Natural History, New York, 
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Evolution, Ecology and Organismal Biology, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Bergen County Academies, Hackensack, NJ, USA.
(5)Biological Sciences, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(6)Ecology, Evolution, and Environmental Biology, Columbia University, New York, 
NY, USA.

Spatial models show that genetic differentiation between populations can be 
explained by factors ranging from geographic distance to environmental 
resistance across the landscape. However, genomes exhibit a landscape of 
differentiation, indicating that multiple processes may mediate divergence in 
different portions of the genome. We tested this idea by comparing alternative 
geographic predctors of differentiation in ten bird species that co-occur in 
Sonoran and Chihuahuan Deserts of North America. Using population-level genomic 
data, we described the genomic landscapes across species and modeled conditions 
that represented historical and contemporary mechanisms. The characteristics of 
genomic landscapes differed across species, influenced by varying levels of 
population structuring and admixture between deserts, and the best-fit models 
contrasted between the whole genome and partitions along the genome. Both 
historical and contemporary mechanisms were important in explaining genetic 
distance, but particularly past and current environments, suggesting that 
genomic evolution was modulated by climate and habitat There were also different 
best-ftit models across genomic partitions of the data, indicating that these 
regions capture different evolutionary histories. These results show that the 
genomic landscape of differentiation can be associated with alternative 
geographic factors operating on different portions of the genome, which reflect 
how heterogeneous patterns of genetic differentiation can evolve across species 
and genomes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac200
PMCID: PMC9577548
PMID: 36134537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac202. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac202.

Functional Divergence in a Multi-gene Family Is a Key Evolutionary Innovation 
for Anaerobic Growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Krause DJ(1), Hittinger CT(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Wisconsin Energy Institute, DOE Great Lakes Bioenergy 
Research Center, Center for Genomic Science Innovation, J. F. Crow Institute for 
the Study of Evolution, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI.

The amplification and diversification of genes into large multi-gene families 
often mark key evolutionary innovations, but this process often creates genetic 
redundancy that hinders functional investigations. When the model budding yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae transitions to anaerobic growth conditions, the cell 
massively induces the expression of seven serine/threonine-rich 
anaerobically-induced cell wall mannoproteins (anCWMPs): TIP1, TIR1, TIR2, TIR3, 
TIR4, DAN1, and DAN4. Here, we show that these genes likely derive 
evolutionarily from a single ancestral anCWMP locus, which was duplicated and 
translocated to new genomic contexts several times both prior to and following 
the budding yeast whole genome duplication (WGD) event. Based on synteny and 
their phylogeny, we separate the anCWMPs into four gene subfamilies. To resolve 
prior inconclusive genetic investigations of these genes, we constructed a set 
of combinatorial deletion mutants to determine their contributions toward 
anaerobic growth in S. cerevisiae. We found that two genes, TIR1 and TIR3, were 
together necessary and sufficient for the anCWMP contribution to anaerobic 
growth. Overexpressing either gene alone was insufficient for anaerobic growth, 
implying that they encode non-overlapping functional roles in the cell during 
anaerobic growth. We infer from the phylogeny of the anCWMP genes that these two 
important genes derive from an ancient duplication that predates the WGD event, 
whereas the TIR1 subfamily experienced gene family amplification after the WGD 
event. Taken together, the genetic and molecular evidence suggests that one key 
anCWMP gene duplication event, several auxiliary gene duplication events, and 
functional divergence underpin the evolution of anaerobic growth in budding 
yeasts.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac202
PMCID: PMC9551191
PMID: 36134526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac199. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac199.

Inferring Epistasis from Genetic Time-series Data.

Sohail MS(1), Louie RHY(2), Hong Z(3), Barton JP(3)(4), McKay MR(1)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Hong Kong University of 
Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China.
(2)The Kirby Institute, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Riverside, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Hong Kong University of 
Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, at The 
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.

Epistasis refers to fitness or functional effects of mutations that depend on 
the sequence background in which these mutations arise. Epistasis is prevalent 
in nature, including populations of viruses, bacteria, and cancers, and can 
contribute to the evolution of drug resistance and immune escape. However, it is 
difficult to directly estimate epistatic effects from sampled observations of a 
population. At present, there are very few methods that can disentangle the 
effects of selection (including epistasis), mutation, recombination, genetic 
drift, and genetic linkage in evolving populations. Here we develop a method to 
infer epistasis, along with the fitness effects of individual mutations, from 
observed evolutionary histories. Simulations show that we can accurately infer 
pairwise epistatic interactions provided that there is sufficient genetic 
diversity in the data. Our method also allows us to identify which fitness 
parameters can be reliably inferred from a particular data set and which ones 
are unidentifiable. Our approach therefore allows for the inference of more 
complex models of selection from time-series genetic data, while also 
quantifying uncertainty in the inferred parameters.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac199
PMCID: PMC9558069
PMID: 36130322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac198. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac198.

The Heterogeneity in the Landscape of Gene Dominance in Maize is Accompanied by 
Unique Chromatin Environments.

Yin L(1), Xu G(2)(3), Yang J(2)(3), Zhao M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Miami University, Oxford, OH 45056.
(2)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, 
Lincoln, NE 68588.
(3)Center for Plant Science Innovation, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, 
NE 68583.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and 
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611.

Subgenome dominance after whole-genome duplication (WGD) has been observed in 
many plant species. However, the degree to which the chromatin environment 
affects this bias has not been explored. Here, we compared the dominant 
subgenome (maize1) and the recessive subgenome (maize2) with respect to patterns 
of sequence substitutions, genes expression, transposable element accumulation, 
small interfering RNAs, DNA methylation, histone modifications, and accessible 
chromatin regions (ACRs). Our data show that the degree of bias between 
subgenomes for all the measured variables does not vary significantly when both 
of the WGD genes are located in pericentromeric regions. Our data further 
indicate that the location of maize1 genes in chromosomal arms is pivotal for 
maize1 to maintain its dominance, but location has a less effect on maize2 
homoeologs. In addition to homoeologous genes, we compared ACRs, which often 
harbor cis-regulatory elements, between the two subgenomes and demonstrate that 
maize1 ACRs have a higher level of chromatin accessibility, a lower level of 
sequence substitution, and are enriched in chromosomal arms. Furthermore, we 
find that a loss of maize1 ACRs near their nearby genes is associated with a 
reduction in purifying selection and expression of maize1 genes relative to 
their maize2 homoeologs. Taken together, our data suggest that chromatin 
environment and cis-regulatory elements are important determinants shaping the 
divergence and evolution of duplicated genes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac198
PMCID: PMC9547528
PMID: 36130304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac189. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac189.

Genomes From Historic DNA Unveil Massive Hidden Extinction and Terminal 
Endangerment in a Tropical Asian Songbird Radiation.

Wu MY(1), Lau CJ(1), Ng EYX(1), Baveja P(1), Gwee CY(1), Sadanandan K(1), 
Ferasyi TR(2), Haminuddin(2), Ramadhan R(2), Menner JK(3), Rheindt FE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universitas Syiah Kuala, Darussalam-Banda 
Aceh, Indonesia.
(3)Prigen Conservation Breeding Ark, Prigen, Indonesia.

Quantifying the magnitude of the global extinction crisis is important but 
remains challenging, as many extinction events pass unnoticed owing to our 
limited taxonomic knowledge of the world's organisms. The increasing rarity of 
many taxa renders comprehensive sampling difficult, further compounding the 
problem. Vertebrate lineages such as birds, which are thought to be 
taxonomically well understood, are therefore used as indicator groups for 
mapping and quantifying global extinction. To test whether extinction patterns 
are adequately gauged in well-studied groups, we implemented ancient-DNA 
protocols and retrieved whole genomes from the historic DNA of museum specimens 
in a widely known songbird radiation of shamas (genus Copsychus) that is assumed 
to be of least conservation concern. We uncovered cryptic diversity and an 
unexpected degree of hidden extinction and terminal endangerment. Our analyses 
reveal that >40% of the phylogenetic diversity of this radiation is already 
either extinct in the wild or nearly so, including the two genomically most 
distinct members of this group (omissus and nigricauda), which have so far flown 
under the conservation radar as they have previously been considered subspecies. 
Comparing the genomes of modern samples with those from roughly a century ago, 
we also found a significant decrease in genetic diversity and a concomitant 
increase in homozygosity affecting various taxa, including small-island endemics 
that are extinct in the wild as well as subspecies that remain widespread across 
the continental scale. Our application of modern genomic approaches demonstrates 
elevated levels of allelic and taxonomic diversity loss in a songbird clade that 
has not been listed as globally threatened, highlighting the importance of 
ongoing reassessments of extinction incidence even across well-studied animal 
groups. Key words: extinction, introgression, white-rumped shama, conservation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac189
PMCID: PMC9486911
PMID: 36124912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac197. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac197.

The Statistical Trends of Protein Evolution: A Lesson from AlphaFold Database.

Tang QY(1), Ren W(2), Wang J(3), Kaneko K(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neural Computation and Adaptation, RIKEN Center for Brain 
Science, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0106, Japan.
(2)Theoretical Molecular Science Laboratory, RIKEN Cluster for Pioneering 
Research, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(3)School of Physics, National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructure, and 
Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, 
Nanjing 210093, People's Republic of China.
(4)Center for Complex Systems Biology, Universal Biology Institute, University 
of Tokyo, Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan.
(5)The Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 17, 
Copenhagen 2100-DK, Denmark.

The recent development of artificial intelligence provides us with new and 
powerful tools for studying the mysterious relationship between organism 
evolution and protein evolution. In this work, based on the AlphaFold Protein 
Structure Database (AlphaFold DB), we perform comparative analyses of the 
proteins of different organisms. The statistics of AlphaFold-predicted 
structures show that, for organisms with higher complexity, their constituent 
proteins will have larger radii of gyration, higher coil fractions, and slower 
vibrations, statistically. By conducting normal mode analysis and scaling 
analyses, we demonstrate that higher organismal complexity correlates with lower 
fractal dimensions in both the structure and dynamics of the constituent 
proteins, suggesting that higher functional specialization is associated with 
higher organismal complexity. We also uncover the topology and sequence bases of 
these correlations. As the organismal complexity increases, the residue contact 
networks of the constituent proteins will be more assortative, and these 
proteins will have a higher degree of hydrophilic-hydrophobic segregation in the 
sequences. Furthermore, by comparing the statistical structural proximity across 
the proteomes with the phylogenetic tree of homologous proteins, we show that, 
statistical structural proximity across the proteomes may indirectly reflect the 
phylogenetic proximity, indicating a statistical trend of protein evolution in 
parallel with organism evolution. This study provides new insights into how the 
diversity in the functionality of proteins increases and how the dimensionality 
of the manifold of protein dynamics reduces during evolution, contributing to 
the understanding of the origin and evolution of lives.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac197
PMCID: PMC9550990
PMID: 36108094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac191. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac191.

Mitochondrial Genomes in Perkinsus Decode Conserved Frameshifts in All Genes.

Gornik SG(1), Flores V(2), Reinhardt F(3), Erber L(4), Salas-Leiva DE(2), 
Douvropoulou O(5), Lassadi I(2), Einarsson E(2), Mörl M(4), Git A(2), Stadler 
PF(3)(6)(7)(8), Pain A(5)(9), Waller RF(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Organismal Studies, University of Heidelberg, INF 230, Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 230, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Hopkins Building, 
Downing Site, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QW, United Kingdom.
(3)Bioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science and Interdisciplinary 
Center for Bioinformatics, Leipzig University, Härtelstraße 16-18, 04107 
Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Institute for Biochemistry, Leipzig University, Brüderstr. 34, 04103 Leipzig, 
Germany.
(5)Pathogen Genomics Group, Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering 
Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 
23955-6900, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(6)Discrete Biomathematics, Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the 
Sciences, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(7)Theoretical Biochemistry Group, Institute for Theoretical Chemistry, 
University of Vienna, Währinger Str. 17, Alsergrund, Vienna 1090, Austria.
(8)Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA.
(9)International Institute for Zoonosis Control, Hokkaido University, 001-0020 
North 20, West 10 Kita-ku, Sapporo 001-0020, Japan.

Mitochondrial genomes of apicomplexans, dinoflagellates, and chrompodellids that 
collectively make up the Myzozoa, encode only three proteins (Cytochrome b 
[COB], Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 [COX1], Cytochrome c oxidase subunit 3 
[COX3]), contain fragmented ribosomal RNAs, and display extensive recombination, 
RNA trans-splicing, and RNA-editing. The early-diverging Perkinsozoa is the 
final major myzozoan lineage whose mitochondrial genomes remained poorly 
characterized. Previous reports of Perkinsus genes indicated independent 
acquisition of non-canonical features, namely the occurrence of multiple 
frameshifts. To determine both ancestral myzozoan and novel perkinsozoan 
mitochondrial genome features, we sequenced and assembled mitochondrial genomes 
of four Perkinsus species. These data show a simple ancestral genome with the 
common reduced coding capacity but disposition for rearrangement. We identified 
75 frameshifts across the four species that occur as distinct types and that are 
highly conserved in gene location. A decoding mechanism apparently employs 
unused codons at the frameshift sites that advance translation either +1 or +2 
frames to the next used codon. The locations of frameshifts are seemingly 
positioned to regulate protein folding of the nascent protein as it emerges from 
the ribosome. The cox3 gene is distinct in containing only one frameshift and 
showing strong selection against residues that are otherwise frequently encoded 
at the frameshift positions in cox1 and cob. All genes lack cysteine codons 
implying a reduction to 19 amino acids in these genomes. Furthermore, 
mitochondrion-encoded rRNA fragment complements are incomplete in Perkinsus spp. 
but some are found in the nuclear DNA suggesting import into the organelle. 
Perkinsus demonstrates further remarkable trajectories of organelle genome 
evolution including pervasive integration of frameshift translation into genome 
expression.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac191
PMCID: PMC9550989
PMID: 36108082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac196. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac196.

VIVID: A Web Application for Variant Interpretation and Visualization in 
Multi-dimensional Analyses.

Tichkule S(1)(2), Myung Y(3)(4), Naung MT(1)(2), Ansell BRE(1), Guy AJ(5), 
Srivastava N(6), Mehra S(7), Cacciò SM(8), Mueller I(1), Barry AE(7)(9), van 
Oosterhout C(10), Pope B(11)(12)(13)(14), Ascher DB(3)(4), Jex AR(1)(15).

Author information:
(1)Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Systems and Computational Biology, Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Computational Biology and Clinical Informatics, Baker Heart and Diabetes, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(5)School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Department of Data Science and AI, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(7)Life Sciences Discipline, Burnet Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(8)Department of Infectious Disease, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(9)Institute of Mental and Physical Health and Clinical Translation (IMPACT) and 
School of Medicine, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
(10)School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich 
Research Park, Norwich, UK.
(11)Melbourne Bioinformatics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(12)Australian BioCommons, Sydney, Australia.
(13)Department of Clinical Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(14)Department of Surgery (Royal Melbourne Hospital), University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(15)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.

Large-scale comparative genomics- and population genetic studies generate 
enormous amounts of polymorphism data in the form of DNA variants. Ultimately, 
the goal of many of these studies is to associate genetic variants to phenotypes 
or fitness. We introduce VIVID, an interactive, user-friendly web application 
that integrates a wide range of approaches for encoding genotypic to phenotypic 
information in any organism or disease, from an individual or population, in 
three-dimensional (3D) space. It allows mutation mapping and annotation, 
calculation of interactions and conservation scores, prediction of harmful 
effects, analysis of diversity and selection, and 3D visualization of genotypic 
information encoded in Variant Call Format on AlphaFold2 protein models. VIVID 
enables the rapid assessment of genes of interest in the study of adaptive 
evolution and the genetic load, and it helps prioritizing targets for 
experimental validation. We demonstrate the utility of VIVID by exploring the 
evolutionary genetics of the parasitic protist Plasmodium falciparum, revealing 
geographic variation in the signature of balancing selection in potential 
targets of functional antibodies.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac196
PMCID: PMC9514033
PMID: 36103257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac193. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac193.

Deleterious Mutations and the Rare Allele Burden on Rice Gene Expression.

Lye Z(1), Choi JY(1), Purugganan MD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, New York, NY 
10003.
(2)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu 
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.

Deleterious genetic variation is maintained in populations at low frequencies. 
Under a model of stabilizing selection, rare (and presumably deleterious) 
genetic variants are associated with increase or decrease in gene expression 
from some intermediate optimum. We investigate this phenomenon in a population 
of largely Oryza sativa ssp. indica rice landraces under normal unstressed wet 
and stressful drought field conditions. We include single nucleotide 
polymorphisms, insertion/deletion mutations, and structural variants in our 
analysis and find a stronger association between rare variants and gene 
expression outliers under the stress condition. We also show an association of 
the strength of this rare variant effect with linkage, gene expression levels, 
network connectivity, local recombination rate, and fitness consequence scores, 
consistent with the stabilizing selection model of gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac193
PMCID: PMC9512150
PMID: 36073358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac187. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac187.

The High Mutational Sensitivity of ccdA Antitoxin Is Linked to Codon Optimality.

Chandra S(1), Gupta K(1), Khare S(1), Kohli P(1), Asok A(1), Mohan SV(2), Gowda 
H(2), Varadarajan R(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biophysics Unit, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, 
India.
(2)Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore 560100, India.

Deep mutational scanning studies suggest that synonymous mutations are typically 
silent and that most exposed, nonactive-site residues are tolerant to mutations. 
Here, we show that the ccdA antitoxin component of the Escherichia coli ccdAB 
toxin-antitoxin system is unusually sensitive to mutations when studied in the 
operonic context. A large fraction (∼80%) of single-codon mutations, including 
many synonymous mutations in the ccdA gene shows inactive phenotype, but they 
retain native-like binding affinity towards cognate toxin, CcdB. Therefore, the 
observed phenotypic effects are largely not due to alterations in protein 
structure/stability, consistent with a large region of CcdA being intrinsically 
disordered. E. coli codon preference and strength of ribosome-binding associated 
with translation of downstream ccdB gene are found to be major contributors of 
the observed ccdA mutant phenotypes. In select cases, proteomics studies reveal 
altered ratios of CcdA:CcdB protein levels in vivo, suggesting that the ccdA 
mutations likely alter relative translation efficiencies of the two genes in the 
operon. We extend these results by studying single-site synonymous mutations 
that lead to loss of function phenotypes in the relBE operon upon introduction 
of rarer codons. Thus, in their operonic context, genes are likely to be more 
sensitive to both synonymous and nonsynonymous point mutations than inferred 
previously.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac187
PMCID: PMC9555053
PMID: 36069948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac192. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac192.

Sirtuin Evolution at the Dawn of Animal Life.

Gold DA(1), Sinclair DA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of California, Davis, 
Davis, CA.
(2)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Sirtuins are a family of proteins that protect against cellular injury and 
aging; understanding their evolution should reveal fundamental mechanisms 
governing longevity. "Early-branching" animals such as sea sponges and jellyfish 
have been understudied in previous analyses of sirtuin diversity. These 
organisms not only hold important positions at the base of the evolutionary 
tree, but also have unique aging dynamics that defy convention, such as 
quasi-immortality and high regenerative capacity. In this study, we survey the 
evolution of sirtuin proteins in animals, with a focus on the oldest living 
lineages. We describe previously unrecognized expansions of "Class IV" and 
"Class I" sirtuins around the origin of animals, raising the number of sirtuin 
families in the last common ancestor to at least nine. Most of these undescribed 
sirtuins have been lost in vertebrates and other bilaterian animals. Our work 
also clarifies the evolution of PNC1 and NAMPT enzymes that carry out the 
rate-limiting step in sirtuin-related NAD+ biosynthesis. The genes for PNC1 and 
NAMPT enzymes were both present in the first animals, with the genes being lost 
a minimum of 11 and 13 times, respectively, over the course of animal evolution. 
We propose that species with these ancestral gene repertoires are ideal model 
organisms for studying the genetic regulation of animal longevity and will 
provide clues to increasing longevity in humans.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac192
PMCID: PMC9486876
PMID: 36065792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac190. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac190.

Endogenous Viral Elements in Shrew Genomes Provide Insights into Pestivirus 
Ancient History.

Li Y(1), Bletsa M(1), Zisi Z(1), Boonen I(1), Gryseels S(1)(2), Kafetzopoulou 
L(1)(3), Webster JP(4), Catalano S(4), Pybus OG(4), Van de Perre F(2), Li H(5), 
Li Y(5), Li Y(5), Abramov A(6), Lymberakis P(7), Lemey P(1), Lequime S(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Belgium Evolutionary Ecology Group, University of Antwerp, 2610 Wilrijk, 
Belgium.
(3)Virology Department, Belgium Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, 
20359 Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathobiology and Population Science, Royal Veterinary College, 
University of London, Herts, AL9 7TA, UK.
(5)Marine College, Shandong University (Weihai), 264209 Weihai, China.
(6)Laboratory of Theriology, Zoological Institute of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, 190121 Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(7)Natural History Museum of Crete, Iraklio 712 02, Greece.
(8)Cluster of Microbial Ecology, Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life 
Sciences, University of Groningen, 9747 AG Groningen, the Netherlands.

As viral genomic imprints in host genomes, endogenous viral elements (EVEs) shed 
light on the deep evolutionary history of viruses, ancestral host ranges, and 
ancient viral-host interactions. In addition, they may provide crucial 
information for calibrating viral evolutionary timescales. In this study, we 
conducted a comprehensive in silico screening of a large data set of available 
mammalian genomes for EVEs deriving from members of the viral family 
Flaviviridae, an important group of viruses including well-known human 
pathogens, such as Zika, dengue, or hepatitis C viruses. We identified two novel 
pestivirus-like EVEs in the reference genome of the Indochinese shrew (Crocidura 
indochinensis). Homologs of these novel EVEs were subsequently detected in vivo 
by molecular detection and sequencing in 27 shrew species, including 26 species 
representing a wide distribution within the Crocidurinae subfamily and one in 
the Soricinae subfamily on different continents. Based on this wide 
distribution, we estimate that the integration event occurred before the last 
common ancestor of the subfamily, about 10.8 million years ago, attesting to an 
ancient origin of pestiviruses and Flaviviridae in general. Moreover, we provide 
the first description of Flaviviridae-derived EVEs in mammals even though the 
family encompasses numerous mammal-infecting members. This also suggests that 
shrews were past and perhaps also current natural reservoirs of pestiviruses. 
Taken together, our results expand the current known Pestivirus host range and 
provide novel insight into the ancient evolutionary history of pestiviruses and 
the Flaviviridae family in general.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac190
PMCID: PMC9550988
PMID: 36063436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac185. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac185.

Evolutionary History and Strength of Selection Determine the Rate of Antibiotic 
Resistance Adaptation.

Cisneros-Mayoral S(1), Graña-Miraglia L(2), Pérez-Morales D(3), Peña-Miller 
R(3), Fuentes-Hernández A(1).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Biología Sintética, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, 62210 Cuernavaca, Mexico.
(2)Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Programa de Biología de Sistemas, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, 62210 Cuernavaca, Mexico.

Bacterial adaptation to stressful environments often produces evolutionary 
constraints whereby increases in resistance are associated with reduced fitness 
in a different environment. The exploitation of this resistance-cost trade-off 
has been proposed as the basis of rational antimicrobial treatment strategies 
designed to limit the evolution of drug resistance in bacterial pathogens. 
Recent theoretical, laboratory, and clinical studies have shown that fluctuating 
selection can maintain drug efficacy and even restore drug susceptibility, but 
can also increase the rate of adaptation and promote cross-resistance to other 
antibiotics. In this paper, we combine mathematical modeling, experimental 
evolution, and whole-genome sequencing to follow evolutionary trajectories 
towards β-lactam resistance under fluctuating selective conditions. Our 
experimental model system consists of eight populations of Escherichia coli K12 
evolving in parallel to a serial dilution protocol designed to dynamically 
control the strength of selection for resistance. We implemented adaptive ramps 
with mild and strong selection, resulting in evolved populations with similar 
levels of resistance, but with different evolutionary dynamics and diverging 
genotypic profiles. We found that mutations that emerged under strong selection 
are unstable in the absence of selection, in contrast to resistance mutations 
previously selected in the mild selection regime that were stably maintained in 
drug-free environments and positively selected for when antibiotics were 
reintroduced. Altogether, our population dynamics model and the phenotypic and 
genomic analysis of the evolved populations show that the rate of resistance 
adaptation is contingent upon the strength of selection, but also on 
evolutionary constraints imposed by prior drug exposures.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac185
PMCID: PMC9512152
PMID: 36062982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac186. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac186.

Protein Conformational Space at the Edge of Allostery: Turning a Nonallosteric 
Malate Dehydrogenase into an "Allosterized" Enzyme Using Evolution-Guided 
Punctual Mutations.

Iorio A(1)(2), Brochier-Armanet C(3), Mas C(4), Sterpone F(1)(2), Madern D(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie Théorique, CNRS, Université de Paris, UPR 9080, 
Paris, France.
(2)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique-Fondation Edmond de Rothschild, PSL 
Research University, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive, Univ Lyon, Université Lyon 1, 
CNRS, UMR5558, Villeurbanne, France.
(4)CEA, CNRS, IBS, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France.

We unveil the intimate relationship between protein dynamics and allostery by 
following the trajectories of model proteins in their conformational and 
sequence spaces. Starting from a nonallosteric hyperthermophilic malate 
dehydrogenase, we have tracked the role of protein dynamics in the evolution of 
the allosteric capacity. Based on a large phylogenetic analysis of the malate 
(MalDH) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) superfamily, we identified two amino 
acid positions that could have had a major role for the emergence of allostery 
in LDHs, which we targeted for investigation by site-directed mutagenesis. 
Wild-type MalDH and the single and double mutants were tested with respect to 
their substrate recognition profiles. The double mutant displayed a 
sigmoid-shaped profile typical of homotropic activation in LDH. By using 
molecular dynamics simulations, we showed that the mutations induce a drastic 
change in the protein sampling of its conformational landscape, making 
transiently T-like (inactive) conformers, typical of allosteric LDHs, 
accessible. Our data fit well with the seminal key concept linking protein 
dynamics and evolvability. We showed that the selection of a new phenotype can 
be achieved by a few key dynamics-enhancing mutations causing the enrichment of 
low-populated conformational substates.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac186
PMCID: PMC9486893
PMID: 36056899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac188. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac188.

Changes in Ploidy Drive Reproduction Transition and Genomic Diversity in a 
Polyploid Fish Complex.

Lu M(1)(2), Li Z(1)(2), Zhu ZY(1)(2), Peng F(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Li XY(1)(2), 
Wang ZW(1)(2), Zhang XJ(1)(2), Zhou L(1)(2), Gui JF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Hubei Hongshan 
Laboratory, the Innovation Academy of Seed Design, Institute of Hydrobiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.

Unisexual animals are commonly found in some polyploid species complexes, and 
most of these species have had a long evolutionary history. However, their 
method for avoiding genomic decay remains unclear. The polyploid Carassius 
complex naturally comprises the sexual amphidiploid C. auratus (crucian carp or 
goldfish) (AABB) and the gynogenetic amphitriploid C. gibelio (gibel carp) 
(AAABBB). Recently, we developed a fertile synthetic amphitetraploid (AAAABBBB) 
male from C. gibelio by incorporating a C. auratus genome. In this study, we 
generated novel amphitriploids (AAABBB) by backcrossing the amphitetraploid male 
with the amphidiploid C. auratus. Whole-genome resequencing revealed the genomic 
changes, including recombination and independent assortment between homologs of 
C. gibelio and C. auratus. The fertility, sex determination system, oocyte 
development, and fertilization behaviors of the novel amphitriploids were 
investigated. Approximately 80% of the novel amphitriploid females recovered the 
unisexual gynogenesis ability. Intriguingly, two types of primary oocyte (with 
and without homolog synapsis) were discovered, and their distinct development 
fates were observed. Type I oocytes entered apoptosis due to improper 
synaptonemal complex assembly and incomplete double-strand break repair, whereas 
subsequent type II oocytes bypassed meiosis through an alternative ameiotic 
pathway to develop into mature eggs. Moreover, gynogenesis was stabilized in 
their offspring, and a new array of diverse gynogenetic amphitriploid clones was 
produced. These revealed genomic changes and detailed cytological data provide 
comprehensive evidence that changes in ploidy drive unisexual and sexual 
reproduction transition, thereby resulting in genomic diversity and allowing C. 
gibelio avoid genomic decay.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac188
PMCID: PMC9486886
PMID: 36056821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac184. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac184.

The Genomic Basis of Evolutionary Novelties in a Leafhopper.

Li Z(1), Li Y(1)(2), Xue AZ(1), Dang V(3), Holmes VR(4), Johnston JS(4), Barrick 
JE(3), Moran NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 
TX, USA.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, 
Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.

Evolutionary innovations generate phenotypic and species diversity. Elucidating 
the genomic processes underlying such innovations is central to understanding 
biodiversity. In this study, we addressed the genomic basis of evolutionary 
novelties in the glassy-winged sharpshooter (Homalodisca vitripennis, GWSS), an 
agricultural pest. Prominent evolutionary innovations in leafhoppers include 
brochosomes, proteinaceous structures that are excreted and used to coat the 
body, and obligate symbiotic associations with two bacterial types that reside 
within cytoplasm of distinctive cell types. Using PacBio long-read sequencing 
and Dovetail Omni-C technology, we generated a chromosome-level genome assembly 
for the GWSS and then validated the assembly using flow cytometry and 
karyotyping. Additional transcriptomic and proteomic data were used to identify 
novel genes that underlie brochosome production. We found that 
brochosome-associated genes include novel gene families that have diversified 
through tandem duplications. We also identified the locations of genes involved 
in interactions with bacterial symbionts. Ancestors of the GWSS acquired 
bacterial genes through horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and these genes appear 
to contribute to symbiont support. Using a phylogenomics approach, we inferred 
HGT sources and timing. We found that some HGT events date to the common 
ancestor of the hemipteran suborder Auchenorrhyncha, representing some of the 
oldest known examples of HGT in animals. Overall, we show that evolutionary 
novelties in leafhoppers are generated by the combination of acquiring novel 
genes, produced both de novo and through tandem duplication, acquiring new 
symbiotic associations that enable use of novel diets and niches, and recruiting 
foreign genes to support symbionts and enhance herbivory.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac184
PMCID: PMC9450646
PMID: 36026509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):msac183. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac183.

Signatures of Convergent Evolution and Natural Selection at the Alcohol 
Dehydrogenase Gene Region are Correlated with Agriculture in Ethnically Diverse 
Africans.

McQuillan MA(1), Ranciaro A(1), Hansen MEB(1), Fan S(2), Beggs W(1), Belay G(3), 
Woldemeskel D(4), Tishkoff SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Human Phenome Institute, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Department of Microbial Cellular and Molecular Biology, Addis Ababa 
University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(4)Department of Biology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

The alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) family of genes encodes enzymes that catalyze 
the metabolism of ethanol into acetaldehyde. Nucleotide variation in ADH genes 
can affect the catalytic properties of these enzymes and is associated with a 
variety of traits, including alcoholism and cancer. Some ADH variants, including 
the ADH1B*48His (rs1229984) mutation in the ADH1B gene, reduce the risk of 
alcoholism and are under positive selection in multiple human populations. The 
advent of Neolithic agriculture and associated increase in fermented foods and 
beverages is hypothesized to have been a selective force acting on such 
variants. However, this hypothesis has not been tested in populations outside of 
Asia. Here, we use genome-wide selection scans to show that the ADH gene region 
is enriched for variants showing strong signals of positive selection in 
multiple Afroasiatic-speaking, agriculturalist populations from Ethiopia, and 
that this signal is unique among sub-Saharan Africans. We also observe strong 
selection signals at putatively functional variants in nearby lipid metabolism 
genes, which may influence evolutionary dynamics at the ADH region. Finally, we 
show that haplotypes carrying these selected variants were introduced into 
Northeast Africa from a West-Eurasian source within the last ∼2,000 years and 
experienced positive selection following admixture. These selection signals are 
not evident in nearby, genetically similar populations that practice 
hunting/gathering or pastoralist subsistence lifestyles, supporting the 
hypothesis that the emergence of agriculture shapes patterns of selection at ADH 
genes. Together, these results enhance our understanding of how adaptations to 
diverse environments and diets have influenced the African genomic landscape.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac183
PMCID: PMC9547508
PMID: 36026493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac179. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac179.

The Genetic Echo of the Tarim Mummies in Modern Central Asians.

Dai SS(1)(2), Sulaiman X(1)(3), Isakova J(4), Xu WF(5), Abdulloevich NT(6), 
Afanasevna ME(6), Ibrohimovich KB(6), Chen X(7)(8), Yang WK(8), Wang MS(9), Shen 
QK(1)(2), Yang XY(10)(11), Yao YG(12)(13)(2), Aldashev AA(4), Saidov A(6), Chen 
W(14)(15), Cheng LF(3), Peng MS(1)(13)(2), Zhang YP(1)(13)(2)(16).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Xinjiang Medical University, 
Urumqi, China.
(4)Institute of Molecular Biology and Medicine, Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan.
(5)Shenzhen Hospital of Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, Shenzhen, 
China.
(6)E.N. Pavlovsky Institute of Zoology and Parasitology, Academy of Sciences of 
Republic of Tajikistan, Dushanbe, Tajikistan.
(7)Research Center for Ecology and Environment of Central Asia, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Urumqi, China.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Desert and Oasis Ecology, Xinjiang Institute of 
Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, China.
(9)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa 
Cruz, CA.
(10)Key Laboratory of Chemistry in Ethnic Medicinal Resource, Yunnan Minzu 
University, Kunming, China.
(11)School of Chemistry and Environment, Yunnan Minzu University, Kunming, 
China.
(12)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(13)KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common 
Diseases, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 
China.
(14)College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, Yunnan Agricultural University, 
Kunming, China.
(15)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming, China.
(16)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, China.

The diversity of Central Asians has been shaped by multiple migrations and 
cultural diffusion. Although ancient DNA studies have revealed the demographic 
changes of the Central Asian since the Bronze Age, the contribution of the 
ancient populations to the modern Central Asian remains opaque. Herein, we 
performed high-coverage sequencing of 131 whole genomes of 
Indo-European-speaking Tajik and Turkic-speaking Kyrgyz populations to explore 
their genomic diversity and admixture history. By integrating the ancient DNA 
data, we revealed more details of the origins and admixture history of Central 
Asians. We found that the major ancestry of present-day Tajik populations can be 
traced back to the admixture of the Bronze Age Bactria-Margiana Archaeological 
Complex and Andronovo-related populations. Highland Tajik populations further 
received additional gene flow from the Tarim mummies, an isolated ancient North 
Eurasian-related population. The West Eurasian ancestry of Kyrgyz is mainly 
derived from Historical Era populations in Xinjiang of China. Furthermore, the 
recent admixture signals detected in both Tajik and Kyrgyz are ascribed to the 
expansions of Eastern Steppe nomadic pastoralists during the Historical Era.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac179
PMCID: PMC9469894
PMID: 36006373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac182. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac182.

Historical Contingency Drives Compensatory Evolution and Rare Reversal of Phage 
Resistance.

Debray R(1), De Luna N(2), Koskella B(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology, Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA, 
USA.
(3)Chan Zuckerberg BioHub, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Bacteria and lytic viruses (phages) engage in highly dynamic coevolutionary 
interactions over time, yet we have little idea of how transient selection by 
phages might shape the future evolutionary trajectories of their host 
populations. To explore this question, we generated genetically diverse 
phage-resistant mutants of the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae. We subjected the 
panel of mutants to prolonged experimental evolution in the absence of phages. 
Some populations re-evolved phage sensitivity, whereas others acquired 
compensatory mutations that reduced the costs of resistance without altering 
resistance levels. To ask whether these outcomes were driven by the initial 
genetic mechanisms of resistance, we next evolved independent replicates of each 
individual mutant in the absence of phages. We found a strong signature of 
historical contingency: some mutations were highly reversible across replicate 
populations, whereas others were highly entrenched. Through whole-genome 
sequencing of bacteria over time, we also found that populations with the same 
resistance gene acquired more parallel sets of mutations than populations with 
different resistance genes, suggesting that compensatory adaptation is also 
contingent on how resistance initially evolved. Our study identifies an 
evolutionary ratchet in bacteria-phage coevolution and may explain previous 
observations that resistance persists over time in some bacterial populations 
but is lost in others. We add to a growing body of work describing the key role 
of phages in the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of their host communities. 
Beyond this specific trait, our study provides a new insight into the genetic 
architecture of historical contingency, a crucial component of interpreting and 
predicting evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac182
PMCID: PMC9447851
PMID: 35994371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac180. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac180.

Evolutionary Tuning of Transient Receptor Potential Ankyrin 1 Underlies the 
Variation in Heat Avoidance Behaviors among Frog Species Inhabiting Diverse 
Thermal Niches.

Saito S(1)(2)(3), Saito CT(1)(2), Igawa T(4)(5), Takeda N(5), Komaki S(6), Ohta 
T(5), Tominaga M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Signaling, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, 
National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Japan.
(2)Thermal Biology Group, Exploratory Research Center on Life and Living Systems 
(ExCELLS), National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Japan.
(3)Department of Physiological Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for 
Advanced Studies), Okazaki, Japan.
(4)Amphibian Research Center, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima, Japan.
(5)Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life, Hiroshima University, 
Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan.
(6)Department of Veterinary Pharmacology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori 
University, Tottori, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):

Environmental temperature is a critical factor for all forms of life, and 
thermal tolerance defines the habitats utilized by a species. Moreover, the 
evolutionary tuning of thermal perception can also play a key role in habitat 
selection. Yet, the relative importance of thermal tolerance and perception in 
environmental adaptation remains poorly understood. Thermal conditions 
experienced by anuran tadpoles differ among species due to the variation in 
breeding seasons and water environments selected by parental frogs. In the 
present study, heat tolerance and avoidance temperatures were compared in 
tadpoles from five anuran species that spatially and temporally inhabit 
different thermal niches. These two parameters were positively correlated with 
each other and were consistent with the thermal conditions of habitats. The 
species difference in avoidance temperature was 2.6 times larger than that in 
heat tolerance, suggesting the importance of heat avoidance responses in habitat 
selection. In addition, the avoidance temperature increased after warm 
acclimation, especially in the species frequently exposed to heat in their 
habitats. Characterization of the heat-sensing transient receptor potential 
ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) ion channel revealed an amphibian-specific alternatively 
spliced variant containing a single valine insertion relative to the canonical 
alternative spliced variant of TRPA1, and this novel variant altered the 
response to thermal stimuli. The two alternatively spliced variants of TRPA1 
exhibited different thermal responses in a species-specific manner, which are 
likely to be associated with a difference in avoidance temperatures among 
species. Together, our findings suggest that the functional change in TRPA1 
plays a crucial role in thermal adaptation processes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac180
PMCID: PMC9447854
PMID: 35994363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac181. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac181.

Origin and Evolution of Nitrogen Fixation in Prokaryotes.

Pi HW(1)(2), Lin JJ(2), Chen CA(2)(3), Wang PH(4)(5), Chiang YR(2), Huang CC(6), 
Young CC(7), Li WH(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Ph.D. Program in Microbial Genomics, National Chung Hsing University and 
Academia Sinica, Taiwan.
(2)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.
(3)Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, Academia Sinica and National 
Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Environmental Engineering, National Central University, 
Taoyuan 32001, Taiwan.
(5)Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo 145-0061, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Life Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 402, 
Taiwan.
(7)Department of Soil and Environmental Sciences, College of Agriculture and 
Natural Resources, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 402, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago 60637, 
IL, USA.

The origin of nitrogen fixation is an important issue in evolutionary biology. 
While nitrogen is required by all living organisms, only a small fraction of 
bacteria and archaea can fix nitrogen. The prevailing view is that nitrogen 
fixation first evolved in archaea and was later transferred to bacteria. 
However, nitrogen-fixing (Nif) bacteria are far larger in number and far more 
diverse in ecological niches than Nif archaea. We, therefore, propose the 
bacteria-first hypothesis, which postulates that nitrogen fixation first evolved 
in bacteria and was later transferred to archaea. As >30,000 prokaryotic genomes 
have been sequenced, we conduct an in-depth comparison of the two hypotheses. We 
first identify the six genes involved in nitrogen fixation in all sequenced 
prokaryotic genomes and then reconstruct phylogenetic trees using the six Nif 
proteins individually or in combination. In each of these trees, the earliest 
lineages are bacterial Nif protein sequences and in the oldest clade (group) the 
archaeal sequences are all nested inside bacterial sequences, suggesting that 
the Nif proteins first evolved in bacteria. The bacteria-first hypothesis is 
further supported by the observation that the majority of Nif archaea carry the 
major bacterial Mo (molybdenum) transporter (ModABC) rather than the archaeal Mo 
transporter (WtpABC). Moreover, in our phylogeny of all available ModA and WtpA 
protein sequences, the earliest lineages are bacterial sequences while archaeal 
sequences are nested inside bacterial sequences. Furthermore, the bacteria-first 
hypothesis is supported by available isotopic data. In conclusion, our study 
strongly supports the bacteria-first hypothesis.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac181
PMCID: PMC9447857
PMID: 35993177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 17;39(8):msac173. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac173. Online 
ahead of print.

The neurodevelopmental gene MSANTD2 belongs to a gene family formed by recurrent 
molecular domestication of Harbinger transposons at the base of vertebrates.

Etchegaray E(1), Baas D(2), Naville M(1), Haftek-Terreau Z(1), Volff JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Ecole Normale Supérieure de 
Lyon, UCBL1, CNRS UMR 5242, Lyon, France.
(2)Unité MeLiS, UCBL-CNRS UMR 5284, INSERM U1314, Lyon, France.

The formation of new genes is a major source of organism evolutionary 
innovation. Beyond their mutational effects, transposable elements can be 
co-opted by host genomes to form different types of sequences including novel 
genes, through a mechanism named molecular domestication.We report the formation 
of four genes through molecular domestication of Harbinger transposons, three in 
a common ancestor of jawed vertebrates about 500 million years ago and one in 
sarcopterygians approx. 430 million years ago. Additionally, one processed 
pseudogene arose approx. 60 million years ago in simians. In zebrafish, 
Harbinger-derived genes are expressed during early development but also in adult 
tissues, and predominantly co-expressed in male brain. In human, expression was 
detected in multiple organs, with major expression in the brain particularly 
during fetal development. We used CRISPR/Cas9 with direct gene knock-out in the 
F0 generation and the morpholino antisense oligonucleotide knock-down technique 
to study in zebrafish the function of one of these genes called MSANTD2, which 
has been suggested to be associated to neuro-developmental diseases such as 
autism spectrum disorders and schizophrenia in human. MSANTD2 inactivation led 
to developmental delays including tail and nervous system malformation at one 
day post fertilization. Affected embryos showed dead cell accumulation, major 
anatomical defects characterized by impaired brain ventricle formation and 
alterations in expression of some characteristic genes involved in vertebrate 
nervous system development. Hence, the characterization of MSANTD2 and other 
Harbinger-derived genes might contribute to a better understanding of the 
genetic innovations having driven the early evolution of the vertebrate nervous 
system.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac173
PMCID: PMC9392472
PMID: 35980103


483. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac178. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac178.

Fitness Landscape Analysis of a tRNA Gene Reveals that the Wild Type Allele is 
Sub-optimal, Yet Mutationally Robust.

Gabzi T(1)(2), Pilpel Y(1), Friedlander T(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 
7610001, Israel.
(2)The Robert H. Smith Institute of Plant Sciences and Genetics in Agriculture, 
Faculty of Agriculture, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 229 Herzl St., Rehovot 
7610001, Israel.

Fitness landscape mapping and the prediction of evolutionary trajectories on 
these landscapes are major tasks in evolutionary biology research. Evolutionary 
dynamics is tightly linked to the landscape topography, but this relation is not 
straightforward. Here, we analyze a fitness landscape of a yeast tRNA gene, 
previously measured under four different conditions. We find that the wild type 
allele is sub-optimal, and 8-10% of its variants are fitter. We rule out the 
possibilities that the wild type is fittest on average on these four conditions 
or located on a local fitness maximum. Notwithstanding, we cannot exclude the 
possibility that the wild type might be fittest in some of the many conditions 
in the complex ecology that yeast lives at. Instead, we find that the wild type 
is mutationally robust ("flat"), while more fit variants are typically 
mutationally fragile. Similar observations of mutational robustness or flatness 
have been so far made in very few cases, predominantly in viral genomes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac178
PMCID: PMC9447856
PMID: 35976926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac177. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac177.

Resistance Evolution against Host-directed Antiviral Agents: Buffalopox Virus 
Switches to Use p38-ϒ under Long-term Selective Pressure of an Inhibitor 
Targeting p38-α.

Chander Y(1)(2), Kumar R(1), Verma A(1)(2), Khandelwal N(1), Nagori H(1), Singh 
N(2), Sharma S(3), Pal Y(1), Puvar A(4), Pandit R(4), Shukla N(4), Chavada P(4), 
Tripathi BN(1), Barua S(1), Kumar N(1).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Veterinary Type Cultures, ICAR-National Research Centre 
on Equines, Hisar, India.
(2)Department of Bio and Nano Technology, Guru Jambeshwar University of Science 
and Technology, Hisar, Haryana, India.
(3)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry, Lala Lajpat Rai 
University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Hiar, Haryana, India.
(4)Gujarat Biotechnology Research Centre, Department of Science & Technology, 
Government of Gujarat, Gandhinagar, India.

Host-dependency factors have increasingly been targeted to minimize antiviral 
drug resistance. In this study, we have demonstrated that inhibition of p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (a cellular protein) suppresses buffalopox 
virus (BPXV) protein synthesis by targeting p38-MNK1-eIF4E signaling pathway. In 
order to provide insights into the evolution of drug resistance, we selected 
resistant mutants by long-term sequential passages (P; n = 60) in the presence 
of p38 inhibitor (SB239063). The P60-SB239063 virus exhibited significant 
resistance to SB239063 as compared to the P60-Control virus. To provide 
mechanistic insights on the acquisition of resistance by BPXV-P60-SB239063, we 
generated p38-α and p38-ϒ (isoforms of p38) knockout Vero cells by 
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing. It was demonstrated that unlike the wild 
type (WT) virus which is dependent on p38-α isoform, the resistant virus 
(BPXV-P60-SB239063) switches over to use p38-ϒ so as to efficiently replicate in 
the target cells. This is a rare evidence wherein a virus was shown to bypass 
the dependency on a critical cellular factor under selective pressure of a drug.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac177
PMCID: PMC9435063
PMID: 35975687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac176. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac176.

Origination of LTR Retroelement-Derived NYNRIN Coincides with Therian Placental 
Emergence.

Plianchaisuk A(1), Kusama K(2), Kato K(3), Sriswasdi S(4), Tamura K(2), Iwasaki 
W(1)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, Graduate School of 
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-0882, Japan.
(2)Department of Endocrine Pharmacology, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life 
Sciences, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392, Japan.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Center of Excellence in Computational Molecular Biology, Research Affairs, 
Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Pathum Wan, Bangkok 10330, 
Thailand.
(5)Department of Integrated Biosciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, 
The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-0882, Japan.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.
(7)Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, 
Chiba 277-0882, Japan.
(8)Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, The University of Tokyo. Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.
(9)Collaborative Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, The University 
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

The emergence of the placenta is a revolutionary event in the evolution of 
therian mammals, to which some LTR retroelement-derived genes, such as PEG10, 
RTL1, and syncytin, are known to contribute. However, therian genomes contain 
many more LTR retroelement-derived genes that may also have contributed to 
placental evolution. We conducted large-scale evolutionary genomic and 
transcriptomic analyses to comprehensively search for LTR retroelement-derived 
genes whose origination coincided with therian placental emergence and that 
became consistently expressed in therian placentae. We identified NYNRIN as 
another Ty3/Gypsy LTR retroelement-derived gene likely to contribute to 
placental emergence in the therian stem lineage. NYNRIN knockdown inhibited the 
invasion of HTR8/SVneo invasive-type trophoblasts, whereas the knockdown of its 
nonretroelement-derived homolog KHNYN did not. Functional enrichment analyses 
suggested that NYNRIN modulates trophoblast invasion by regulating 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and extracellular matrix remodeling and that 
the ubiquitin-proteasome system is responsible for the functional differences 
between NYNRIN and KHNYN. These findings extend our knowledge of the roles of 
LTR retroelement-derived genes in the evolution of therian mammals.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac176
PMCID: PMC9447858
PMID: 35959649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac172. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac172.

Evolutionary Changes in the Chromatin Landscape Contribute to Reorganization of 
a Developmental Gene Network During Rapid Life History Evolution in Sea Urchins.

Davidson PL(1), Byrne M(2), Wray GA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(2)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.

Chromatin configuration is highly dynamic during embryonic development in 
animals, exerting an important point of control in transcriptional regulation. 
Yet there exists remarkably little information about the role of evolutionary 
changes in chromatin configuration to the evolution of gene expression and 
organismal traits. Genome-wide assays of chromatin configuration, coupled with 
whole-genome alignments, can help address this gap in knowledge in several ways. 
In this study we present a comparative analysis of regulatory element sequences 
and accessibility throughout embryogenesis in three sea urchin species with 
divergent life histories: a lecithotroph Heliocidaris erythrogramma, a closely 
related planktotroph H. tuberculata, and a distantly related planktotroph 
Lytechinus variegatus. We identified distinct epigenetic and mutational 
signatures of evolutionary modifications to the function of putative 
cis-regulatory elements in H. erythrogramma that have accumulated nonuniformly 
throughout the genome, suggesting selection, rather than drift, underlies many 
modifications associated with the derived life history. Specifically, regulatory 
elements composing the sea urchin developmental gene regulatory network are 
enriched for signatures of positive selection and accessibility changes which 
may function to alter binding affinity and access of developmental transcription 
factors to these sites. Furthermore, regulatory element changes often correlate 
with divergent expression patterns of genes involved in cell type specification, 
morphogenesis, and development of other derived traits, suggesting these 
evolutionary modifications have been consequential for phenotypic evolution in 
H. erythrogramma. Collectively, our results demonstrate that selective pressures 
imposed by changes in developmental life history rapidly reshape the 
cis-regulatory landscape of core developmental genes to generate novel traits 
and embryonic programs.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac172
PMCID: PMC9435058
PMID: 35946348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac171. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac171.

Phylogenomics Uncovers Evolutionary Trajectory of Nitrogen Fixation in 
Cyanobacteria.

Chen MY(1), Teng WK(2), Zhao L(1), Han BP(3), Song LR(4), Shu WS(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ecological Science, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Subtropical 
Biodiversity and Biomonitoring, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Biotechnology for Plant Development, School of Life Sciences, South China Normal 
University, Guangzhou, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Plant 
Resources, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China.
(3)Department of Ecology and Institute of Hydrobiology, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, PR China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Algal Biology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy 
of Science, Hubei, PR China.

Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) by cyanobacteria is of significant importance 
for the Earth's biogeochemical nitrogen cycle but is restricted to a few genera 
that do not form monophyletic group. To explore the evolutionary trajectory of 
BNF and investigate the driving forces of its evolution, we analyze 650 
cyanobacterial genomes and compile the database of diazotrophic cyanobacteria 
based on the presence of nitrogen fixation gene clusters (NFGCs). We report that 
266 of 650 examined genomes are NFGC-carrying members, and these potentially 
diazotrophic cyanobacteria are unevenly distributed across the phylogeny of 
Cyanobacteria, that multiple independent losses shaped the scattered 
distribution. Among the diazotrophic cyanobacteria, two types of NFGC exist, 
with one being ancestral and abundant, which have descended from diazotrophic 
ancestors, and the other being anaerobe-like and sparse, possibly being acquired 
from anaerobic microbes through horizontal gene transfer. Interestingly, we 
illustrate that the origin of BNF in Cyanobacteria coincide with two major 
evolutionary events. One is the origin of multicellularity of cyanobacteria, and 
the other is concurrent genetic innovations with massive gene gains and 
expansions, implicating their key roles in triggering the evolutionary 
transition from nondiazotrophic to diazotrophic cyanobacteria. Additionally, we 
reveal that genes involved in accelerating respiratory electron transport 
(coxABC), anoxygenic photosynthetic electron transport (sqr), as well as 
anaerobic metabolisms (pfor, hemN, nrdG, adhE) are enriched in diazotrophic 
cyanobacteria, representing adaptive genetic signatures that underpin the 
diazotrophic lifestyle. Collectively, our study suggests that multicellularity, 
together with concurrent genetic adaptations contribute to the evolution of 
diazotrophic cyanobacteria.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac171
PMCID: PMC9435057
PMID: 35946347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Sep 1;39(9):msac156. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac156.

Contrasting Patterns in the Early Stage of SARS-CoV-2 Evolution between Humans 
and Minks.

Tai JH(1)(2), Sun HY(3), Tseng YC(4), Li G(5), Chang SY(6), Yeh SH(7), Chen 
PJ(1)(7)(8)(9)(10), Chaw SM(2)(11), Wang HY(1)(4)(12).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University and 
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Taipei Municipal Zhongshan Girls High School, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)CAS Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology, College 
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Hepatitis Research Center, National Taiwan University College of Medicine and 
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine and National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine and National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(11)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(12)Graduate Institute of Medical Genomics and Proteomics, National Taiwan 
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

One of the unique features of SARS-CoV-2 is its apparent neutral evolution 
during the early pandemic (before February 2020). This contrasts with the 
preceding SARS-CoV epidemics, where viruses evolved adaptively. SARS-CoV-2 may 
exhibit a unique or adaptive feature which deviates from other coronaviruses. 
Alternatively, the virus may have been cryptically circulating in humans for a 
sufficient time to have acquired adaptive changes before the onset of the 
current pandemic. To test the scenarios above, we analyzed the SARS-CoV-2 
sequences from minks (Neovision vision) and parental humans. In the early phase 
of the mink epidemic (April to May 2020), nonsynonymous to synonymous mutation 
ratio per site in the spike protein is 2.93, indicating a selection process 
favoring adaptive amino acid changes. Mutations in the spike protein were 
concentrated within its receptor-binding domain and receptor-binding motif. An 
excess of high-frequency derived variants produced by genetic hitchhiking was 
found during the middle (June to July 2020) and late phase I (August to 
September 2020) of the mink epidemic. In contrast, the site frequency spectra of 
early SARS-CoV-2 in humans only show an excess of low-frequency mutations, 
consistent with the recent outbreak of the virus. Strong positive selection in 
the mink SARS-CoV-2 implies that the virus may not be preadapted to a wide range 
of hosts and illustrates how a virus evolves to establish a continuous infection 
in a new host. Therefore, the lack of positive selection signal during the early 
pandemic in humans deserves further investigation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac156
PMCID: PMC9384665
PMID: 35934827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 6;39(8):msac174. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac174. Online 
ahead of print.

TimeTree 5: An Expanded Resource for Species Divergence Times.

Kumar S(1)(2)(3)(4), Suleski M(1), Craig JM(1)(2)(3), Kasprowicz AE(1)(2)(3), 
Sanderford M(1), Li M(1), Stecher G(1), Hedges SB(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Center for Biodiversity, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.
(4)Center for Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

We present the fifth edition of the TimeTree of Life resource (TToL5), a product 
of the timetree of life project that aims to synthesize published molecular 
timetrees and make evolutionary knowledge easily accessible to all. Using the 
TToL5 web portal, users can retrieve published studies and divergence times 
between species, the timeline of a species' evolution beginning with the origin 
of life, and the timetree for a given evolutionary group at the desired 
taxonomic rank. TToL5 contains divergence time information on 137,306 species, 
41% more than the previous edition. The TToL5 web interface is now ADA-compliant 
and mobile-friendly, a result of comprehensive source code refactoring. TToL5 
also offers programmatic access to species divergence times and timelines 
through an application programming interface, which is accessible at 
timetree.temple.edu/api. TToL5 is publicly available at timetree.org.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac174
PMCID: PMC9400175
PMID: 35932227


490. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac163. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac163.

A Phylogeny-aware GWAS Framework to Correct for Heritable Pathogen Effects on 
Infectious Disease Traits.

Nadeau S(1)(2), Thorball CW(3), Kouyos R(4)(5), Günthard HF(4)(5), Böni J(4), 
Yerly S(6), Perreau M(7), Klimkait T(8), Rauch A(9), Hirsch HH(8)(10)(11), 
Cavassini M(12), Vernazza P(13), Bernasconi E(14), Fellay J(2)(3)(15), Mitov 
V(1)(2), Stadler T(1)(2); Swiss HIV Cohort Study (SHCS).

Collaborators: Abela I, Aebi-Popp K, Anagnostopoulos A, Battegay M, Bernasconi 
E, Braun DL, Bucher HC, Calmy A, Cavassini M, Ciuffi A, Dollenmaier G, Egger M, 
Elzi L, Fehr J, Fellay J, Furrer H, Fux CA, Günthard HF, Hachfeld A, Haerry D, 
Hasse B, Hirsch HH, Hoffmann M, Hösli I, Huber M, Kahlert CR, Kaiser L, Keiser 
O, Klimkait T, Kouyos RD, Kovari H, Kusejko K, Martinetti G, Martinez TB, 
Marzolini C, Metzner KJ, Müller N, Nemeth J, Nicca D, Paioni P, Pantaleo G, 
Perreau M, Rauch A, Schmid P, Speck R, Stöckle M, Tarr P, Trkola A, Wandeler G, 
Yerly S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zürich, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Precision Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital and University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University 
Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Laboratory of Virology, Geneva University 
Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland.
(7)Division of Immunology and Allergy, University Hospital Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(8)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases, Bern University Hospital and University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(10)Transplantation and Clinical Virology, Department of Biomedicine, University 
of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(11)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University 
Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(12)Division of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(13)Division of Infectious Diseases, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, St. Gallen, 
Switzerland.
(14)Division of Infectious Diseases, Regional Hospital Lugano, Lugano, 
Switzerland.
(15)Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Infectious diseases are particularly challenging for genome-wide association 
studies (GWAS) because genetic effects from two organisms (pathogen and host) 
can influence a trait. Traditional GWAS assume individual samples are 
independent observations. However, pathogen effects on a trait can be heritable 
from donor to recipient in transmission chains. Thus, residuals in GWAS 
association tests for host genetic effects may not be independent due to shared 
pathogen ancestry. We propose a new method to estimate and remove heritable 
pathogen effects on a trait based on the pathogen phylogeny prior to host GWAS, 
thus restoring independence of samples. In simulations, we show this additional 
step can increase GWAS power to detect truly associated host variants when 
pathogen effects are highly heritable, with strong phylogenetic correlations. We 
applied our framework to data from two different host-pathogen systems, HIV in 
humans and X. arboricola in A. thaliana. In both systems, the heritability and 
thus phylogenetic correlations turn out to be low enough such that qualitative 
results of GWAS do not change when accounting for the pathogen shared ancestry 
through a correction step. This means that previous GWAS results applied to 
these two systems should not be biased due to shared pathogen ancestry. In 
summary, our framework provides additional information on the evolutionary 
dynamics of traits in pathogen populations and may improve GWAS if pathogen 
effects are highly phylogenetically correlated amongst individuals in a cohort.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac163
PMCID: PMC9366186
PMID: 35921544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac165. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac165.

Assessing Human Genome-wide Variation in the Massim Region of Papua New Guinea 
and Implications for the Kula Trading Tradition.

Liu D(1)(2), Peter BM(1), Schiefenhövel W(3), Kayser M(4), Stoneking M(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Human Evolutionary Genetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, UMR 2000, CNRS, Paris, 
France.
(3)Human Ethology Group, Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, Seewiesen, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Genetic Identification, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center 
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive, UMR 5558, Université 
Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France.

The Massim, a cultural region that includes the southeastern tip of mainland 
Papua New Guinea (PNG) and nearby PNG offshore islands, is renowned for a 
trading network called Kula, in which different valuable items circulate in 
different directions among some of the islands. Although the Massim has been a 
focus of anthropological investigation since the pioneering work of Malinowski 
in 1922, the genetic background of its inhabitants remains relatively 
unexplored. To characterize the Massim genomically, we generated genome-wide SNP 
data from 192 individuals from 15 groups spanning the entire region. Analyzing 
these together with comparative data, we found that all Massim individuals have 
variable Papuan-related (indigenous) and Austronesian-related (arriving ∼3,000 
years ago) ancestries. Individuals from Rossel Island in southern Massim, 
speaking an isolate Papuan language, have the highest amount of a distinct 
Papuan ancestry. We also investigated the recent contact via sharing of 
identical by descent (IBD) genomic segments and found that Austronesian-related 
IBD tracts are widely distributed geographically, but Papuan-related tracts are 
shared exclusively between the PNG mainland and Massim, and between the Bismarck 
and Solomon Archipelagoes. Moreover, the Kula-practicing groups of the Massim 
show higher IBD sharing among themselves than do groups that do not participate 
in Kula. This higher sharing predates the formation of Kula, suggesting that 
extensive contact between these groups since the Austronesian settlement may 
have facilitated the formation of Kula. Our study provides the first 
comprehensive genome-wide assessment of Massim inhabitants and new insights into 
the fascinating Kula system.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac165
PMCID: PMC9372566
PMID: 35920169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac170. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac170.

Phylogenomic Evidence for the Origin of Obligate Anaerobic Anammox Bacteria 
Around the Great Oxidation Event.

Liao T(1), Wang S(1), Stüeken EE(2), Luo H(1).

Author information:
(1)Simon F. S. Li Marine Science Laboratory, School of Life Sciences and State 
Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Shatin, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China.
(2)School of Earth and Environmental Sciences and Centre for Exoplanet Science, 
University of St Andrews, Bute Building, Queen's Terrace KY16 9TS, United 
Kingdom.

The anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) bacteria can transform ammonium and 
nitrite to dinitrogen gas, and this obligate anaerobic process accounts for up 
to half of the global nitrogen loss in surface environments. Yet its origin and 
evolution, which may give important insights into the biogeochemistry of early 
Earth, remain enigmatic. Here, we performed a comprehensive phylogenomic and 
molecular clock analysis of anammox bacteria within the phylum Planctomycetes. 
After accommodating the uncertainties and factors influencing time estimates, 
which include implementing both a traditional cyanobacteria-based and a recently 
developed mitochondria-based molecular dating approach, we estimated a 
consistent origin of anammox bacteria at early Proterozoic and most likely 
around the so-called Great Oxidation Event (GOE; 2.32-2.5 Ga) which 
fundamentally changed global biogeochemical cycles. We further showed that 
during the origin of anammox bacteria, genes involved in oxidative stress 
adaptation, bioenergetics, and anammox granules formation were recruited, which 
might have contributed to their survival on an increasingly oxic Earth. Our 
findings suggest the rising levels of atmospheric oxygen, which made nitrite 
increasingly available, was a potential driving force for the emergence of 
anammox bacteria. This is one of the first studies that link the GOE to the 
evolution of obligate anaerobic bacteria.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac170
PMCID: PMC9387917
PMID: 35920138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac166. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac166.

HAlign 3: Fast Multiple Alignment of Ultra-Large Numbers of Similar DNA/RNA 
Sequences.

Tang F(1)(2), Chao J(1)(3), Wei Y(4), Yang F(5), Zhai Y(3), Xu L(2), Zou 
Q(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Yangtze Delta Region Institute (Quzhou), University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Quzhou, China.
(2)School of Electronic and Communication Engineering, Shenzhen Polytechnic, 
Shenzhen, China.
(3)Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic 
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
(4)School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University, Xi'an, China.
(5)School of Medical Technology and Engineering, Fujian Medical University, 
Fuzhou, China.

HAlign is a cross-platform program that performs multiple sequence alignments 
based on the center star strategy. Here we present two major updates of HAlign 
3, which helped improve the time efficiency and the alignment quality, and made 
HAlign 3 a specialized program to process ultra-large numbers of similar DNA/RNA 
sequences, such as closely related viral or prokaryotic genomes. HAlign 3 can be 
easily installed via the Anaconda and Java release package on macOS, Linux, 
Windows subsystem for Linux, and Windows systems, and the source code is 
available on GitHub (https://github.com/malabz/HAlign-3).

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac166
PMCID: PMC9372455
PMID: 35915051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac161. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac161.

Bayesian Phylogenetic Inference using Relaxed-clocks and the Multispecies 
Coalescent.

Flouri T(1), Huang J(1)(2), Jiao X(1)(3), Kapli P(1), Rannala B(4), Yang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution, and Environment, University College 
London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.
(2)School of Biomedical Engineering, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100069, 
China.
(3)Department of Statistics and Data Science, China Southern University of 
Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, China.
(4)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, Davis, CA 
95616, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):

The multispecies coalescent (MSC) model accommodates both species divergences 
and within-species coalescent and provides a natural framework for phylogenetic 
analysis of genomic data when the gene trees vary across the genome. The MSC 
model implemented in the program bpp assumes a molecular clock and the 
Jukes-Cantor model, and is suitable for analyzing genomic data from closely 
related species. Here we extend our implementation to more general substitution 
models and relaxed clocks to allow the rate to vary among species. The 
MSC-with-relaxed-clock model allows the estimation of species divergence times 
and ancestral population sizes using genomic sequences sampled from contemporary 
species when the strict clock assumption is violated, and provides a simulation 
framework for evaluating species tree estimation methods. We conducted 
simulations and analyzed two real datasets to evaluate the utility of the new 
models. We confirm that the clock-JC model is adequate for inference of shallow 
trees with closely related species, but it is important to account for clock 
violation for distant species. Our simulation suggests that there is valuable 
phylogenetic information in the gene-tree branch lengths even if the molecular 
clock assumption is seriously violated, and the relaxed-clock models implemented 
in bpp are able to extract such information. Our Markov chain Monte Carlo 
algorithms suffer from mixing problems when used for species tree estimation 
under the relaxed clock and we discuss possible improvements. We conclude that 
the new models are currently most effective for estimating population parameters 
such as species divergence times when the species tree is fixed.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac161
PMCID: PMC9366188
PMID: 35907248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac169. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac169.

Is the Mutation Rate Lower in Genomic Regions of Stronger Selective Constraints?

Liu H(1)(2), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Evolutionary and Organismal Biology Research Center, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310000, China.

A study of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana detected lower mutation rates in 
genomic regions where mutations are more likely to be deleterious, challenging 
the principle that mutagenesis is blind to its consequence. To examine the 
generality of this finding, we analyze large mutational data from baker's yeast 
and humans. The yeast data do not exhibit this trend, whereas the human data 
show an opposite trend that disappears upon the control of potential 
confounders. We find that the Arabidopsis study identified substantially more 
mutations than reported in the original data-generating studies and expected 
from Arabidopsis' mutation rate. These extra mutations are enriched in 
polynucleotide tracts and have relatively low sequencing qualities so are likely 
sequencing errors. Furthermore, the polynucleotide "mutations" can produce the 
purported mutational trend in Arabidopsis. Together, our results do not support 
lower mutagenesis of genomic regions of stronger selective constraints in the 
plant, fungal, and animal models examined.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac169
PMCID: PMC9372563
PMID: 35907247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac168. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac168.

Genome Sequencing of up to 6,000-Year-Old Citrullus Seeds Reveals Use of a 
Bitter-Fleshed Species Prior to Watermelon Domestication.

Pérez-Escobar OA(1), Tusso S(2), Przelomska NAS(1), Wu S(3), Ryan P(1), Nesbitt 
M(1), Silber MV(4), Preick M(5), Fei Z(3)(6), Hofreiter M(5), Chomicki G(7), 
Renner SS(4)(8).

Author information:
(1)Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond TW9 3AE, United Kingdom.
(2)Faculty of Biology, Division of Genetics, University of Munich (LMU), 82152 
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(3)Boyce Thompson Institute, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
(4)Faculty of Biology, Systematic Botany and Mycology, University of Munich 
(LMU), 80638 Munich, Germany.
(5)Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Institute for Biochemistry and 
Biology, University of Potsdam, 14476 Potsdam, Germany.
(6)USDA-ARS, Robert W. Holley Center for Agriculture and Health, Ithaca, NY 
14853, USA.
(7)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, School of Bioscience, University of 
Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Biology, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO 63130, USA.

Iconographic evidence from Egypt suggests that watermelon pulp was consumed 
there as a dessert by 4,360 BP. Earlier archaeobotanical evidence comes from 
seeds from Neolithic settlements in Libya, but whether these were watermelons 
with sweet pulp or other forms is unknown. We generated genome sequences from 
6,000- and 3,300-year-old seeds from Libya and Sudan, and from worldwide 
herbarium collections made between 1824 and 2019, and analyzed these data 
together with resequenced genomes from important germplasm collections for a 
total of 131 accessions. Phylogenomic and population-genomic analyses reveal 
that (1) much of the nuclear genome of both ancient seeds is traceable to West 
African seed-use "egusi-type" watermelon (Citrullus mucosospermus) rather than 
domesticated pulp-use watermelon (Citrullus lanatus ssp. vulgaris); (2) the 
6,000-year-old watermelon likely had bitter pulp and greenish-white flesh as 
today found in C. mucosospermus, given alleles in the bitterness regulators ClBT 
and in the red color marker LYCB; and (3) both ancient genomes showed admixture 
from C. mucosospermus, C. lanatus ssp. cordophanus, C. lanatus ssp. vulgaris, 
and even South African Citrullus amarus, and evident introgression between the 
Libyan seed (UMB-6) and populations of C. lanatus. An unexpected new insight is 
that Citrullus appears to have initially been collected or cultivated for its 
seeds, not its flesh, consistent with seed damage patterns induced by human 
teeth in the oldest Libyan material.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac168
PMCID: PMC9387916
PMID: 35907246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac164. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac164.

A Secondary Metabolic Enzyme Functioned as an Evolutionary Seed of a Primary 
Metabolic Enzyme.

Kawaguchi J(1), Mori H(1), Iwai N(1), Wachi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 
Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

The antibiotic alaremycin has a structure that resembles that of 
5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA), a universal precursor of porphyrins, and inhibits 
porphyrin biosynthesis. Genome sequencing of the alaremycin-producing bacterial 
strain and enzymatic analysis revealed that the first step of alaremcyin 
biosynthesis is catalysed by the enzyme, AlmA, which exhibits a high degree of 
similarity to 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS) expressed by animals, protozoa, 
fungi, and α-proteobacteria. Site-directed mutagenesis of AlmA revealed that the 
substitution of two amino acids residues around the substrate binding pocket 
transformed its substrate specificity from that of alaremycin precursor 
synthesis to ALA synthesis. To estimate the evolutionary trajectory of AlmA and 
ALAS, we performed an ancestral sequence reconstitution analysis based on a 
phylogenetic tree of AlmA and ALAS. The reconstructed common ancestral enzyme of 
AlmA and ALAS exhibited alaremycin precursor synthetic activity, rather than ALA 
synthetic activity. These results suggest that ALAS evolved from an AlmA-like 
enzyme. We propose a new evolutionary hypothesis in which a non-essential 
secondary metabolic enzyme acts as an 'evolutionary seed' to generate an 
essential primary metabolic enzyme.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac164
PMCID: PMC9356726
PMID: 35904937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac167. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac167.

Repeat Dynamics across Timescales: A Perspective from Sibling Allotetraploid 
Marsh Orchids (Dactylorhiza majalis s.l.).

Eriksson MC(1)(2), Mandáková T(3)(4)(5), McCann J(1), Temsch EM(1), Chase 
MW(6)(7), Hedrén M(8), Weiss-Schneeweiss H(1), Paun O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Biodiversity Research, University of Vienna, Rennweg 
14, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.
(2)Vienna Graduate School of Population Genetics, Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210 
Vienna, Austria.
(3)Plant Cytogenomics Research Group, CEITEC-Central-European Institute of 
Technology, Masaryk University, Brno 62500, Czech Republic.
(4)Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno 62500, 
Czech Republic.
(5)Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, 
Brno 62500, Czech Republic.
(6)Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, London TW9 3AE, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Environment and Agriculture, Curtin University, Perth, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(8)Department of Biology, University of Lund, Sölvegatan 37, SE-223 62 Lund, 
Sweden.

To provide insights into the fate of transposable elements (TEs) across 
timescales in a post-polyploidization context, we comparatively investigate five 
sibling Dactylorhiza allotetraploids (Orchidaceae) formed independently and 
sequentially between 500 and 100K generations ago by unidirectional 
hybridization between diploids D. fuchsii and D. incarnata. Our results first 
reveal that the paternal D. incarnata genome shows a marked increased content of 
LTR retrotransposons compared to the maternal species, reflected in its larger 
genome size and consistent with a previously hypothesized bottleneck. With 
regard to the allopolyploids, in the youngest D. purpurella both genome size and 
TE composition appear to be largely additive with respect to parents, whereas 
for polyploids of intermediate ages we uncover rampant genome expansion on a 
magnitude of multiple entire genomes of some plants such as Arabidopsis. The 
oldest allopolyploids in the series are not larger than the intermediate ones. A 
putative tandem repeat, potentially derived from a non-autonomous miniature 
inverted-repeat TE (MITE) drives much of the genome dynamics in the 
allopolyploids. The highly dynamic MITE-like element is found in higher 
proportions in the maternal diploid, D. fuchsii, but is observed to increase in 
copy number in both subgenomes of the allopolyploids. Altogether, the fate of 
repeats appears strongly regulated and therefore predictable across multiple 
independent allopolyploidization events in this system. Apart from the MITE-like 
element, we consistently document a mild genomic shock following the 
allopolyploidizations investigated here, which may be linked to their relatively 
large genome sizes, possibly associated with strong selection against further 
genome expansions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac167
PMCID: PMC9366187
PMID: 35904928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac152. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac152.

Evolutionary Genomics of a Subdivided Species.

Maruki T(1), Ye Z(1), Lynch M(1).

Author information:
(1)Biodesign Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

The ways in which genetic variation is distributed within and among populations 
is a key determinant of the evolutionary features of a species. However, most 
comprehensive studies of these features have been restricted to studies of 
subdivision in settings known to have been driven by local adaptation, leaving 
our understanding of the natural dispersion of allelic variation less than 
ideal. Here, we present a geographic population-genomic analysis of 10 
populations of the freshwater microcrustacean Daphnia pulex, an emerging model 
system in evolutionary genomics. These populations exhibit a pattern of moderate 
isolation-by-distance, with an average migration rate of 0.6 individuals per 
generation, and average effective population sizes of ∼650,000 individuals. Most 
populations contain numerous private alleles, and genomic scans highlight the 
presence of islands of excessively high population subdivision for more common 
alleles. A large fraction of such islands of population divergence likely 
reflect historical neutral changes, including rare stochastic migration and 
hybridization events. The data do point to local adaptive divergence, although 
the precise nature of the relevant variation is diffuse and cannot be associated 
with particular loci, despite the very large sample sizes involved in this 
study. In contrast, an analysis of between-species divergence highlights 
positive selection operating on a large set of genes with functions nearly 
nonoverlapping with those involved in local adaptation, in particular ribosome 
structure, mitochondrial bioenergetics, light reception and response, 
detoxification, and gene regulation. These results set the stage for using D. 
pulex as a model for understanding the relationship between molecular and 
cellular evolution in the context of natural environments.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac152
PMCID: PMC9372567
PMID: 35895848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac162. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac162.

Robertsonian Fusion and Centromere Repositioning Contributed to the Formation of 
Satellite-free Centromeres During the Evolution of Zebras.

Cappelletti E(1), Piras FM(1), Sola L(1), Santagostino M(1), Abdelgadir WA(1), 
Raimondi E(1), Lescai F(1), Nergadze SG(1), Giulotto E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Lazzaro Spallanzani", University of 
Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

Centromeres are epigenetically specified by the histone H3 variant CENP-A and 
typically associated with highly repetitive satellite DNA. We previously 
discovered natural satellite-free neocentromeres in Equus caballus and Equus 
asinus. Here, through ChIP-seq with an anti-CENP-A antibody, we found an 
extraordinarily high number of centromeres lacking satellite DNA in the zebras 
Equus burchelli (15 of 22) and Equus grevyi (13 of 23), demonstrating that the 
absence of satellite DNA at the majority of centromeres is compatible with 
genome stability and species survival and challenging the role of satellite DNA 
in centromere function. Nine satellite-free centromeres are shared between the 
two species in agreement with their recent separation. We assembled all 
centromeric regions and improved the reference genome of E. burchelli. Sequence 
analysis of the CENP-A binding domains revealed that they are LINE-1 and AT-rich 
with four of them showing DNA amplification. In the two zebras, satellite-free 
centromeres emerged from centromere repositioning or following Robertsonian 
fusion. In five chromosomes, the centromeric function arose near the fusion 
points, which are located within regions marked by traces of ancestral 
pericentromeric sequences. Therefore, besides centromere repositioning, 
Robertsonian fusions are an important source of satellite-free centromeres 
during evolution. Finally, in one case, a satellite-free centromere was seeded 
on an inversion breakpoint. At 11 chromosomes, whose primary constrictions 
seemed to be associated with satellite repeats by cytogenetic analysis, 
satellite-free neocentromeres were instead located near the ancestral 
inactivated satellite-based centromeres; therefore, the centromeric function has 
shifted away from a satellite repeat containing locus to a satellite-free new 
position.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac162
PMCID: PMC9356731
PMID: 35881460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


501. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac160. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac160.

Comparative Genomics of the Waterfowl Innate Immune System.

Jax E(1)(2)(3), Franchini P(2)(4), Sekar V(5)(6), Ottenburghs J(7)(8), Monné 
Parera D(2), Kellenberger RT(9), Magor KE(10), Müller I(1)(2), Wikelski 
M(1)(11), Kraus RHS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Migration, Max Planck Institute of Animal Behavior, Radolfzell, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biology and Biotechnologies "Charles Darwin", Sapienza 
University, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(6)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm 
University, Sweden.
(7)Wildlife Ecology and Conservation Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, 
The Netherlands.
(8)Forest Ecology and Forest Management Group, Wageningen University, 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences and Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(11)Centre for the Advanced Study of Collective Behaviour, University of 
Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

Animal species differ considerably in their ability to fight off infections. 
Finding the genetic basis of these differences is not easy, as the immune 
response is comprised of a complex network of proteins that interact with one 
another to defend the body against infection. Here, we used population- and 
comparative genomics to study the evolutionary forces acting on the innate 
immune system in natural hosts of the avian influenza virus (AIV). For this 
purpose, we used a combination of hybrid capture, next- generation sequencing 
and published genomes to examine genetic diversity, divergence, and signatures 
of selection in 127 innate immune genes at a micro- and macroevolutionary time 
scale in 26 species of waterfowl. We show across multiple immune pathways (AIV-, 
toll-like-, and RIG-I -like receptors signalling pathways) that genes involved 
genes in pathogen detection (i.e., toll-like receptors) and direct pathogen 
inhibition (i.e., antimicrobial peptides and interferon-stimulated genes), as 
well as host proteins targeted by viral antagonist proteins (i.e., mitochondrial 
antiviral-signaling protein, [MAVS]) are more likely to be polymorphic, 
genetically divergent, and under positive selection than other innate immune 
genes. Our results demonstrate that selective forces vary across innate immune 
signaling signalling pathways in waterfowl, and we present candidate genes that 
may contribute to differences in susceptibility and resistance to infectious 
diseases in wild birds, and that may be manipulated by viruses. Our findings 
improve our understanding of the interplay between host genetics and pathogens, 
and offer the opportunity for new insights into pathogenesis and potential drug 
targets.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac160
PMCID: PMC9356732
PMID: 35880574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac159. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac159.

New Phylogenetic Models Incorporating Interval-Specific Dispersal Dynamics 
Improve Inference of Disease Spread.

Gao J(1), May MR(1)(2), Rannala B(1), Moore BR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, Storer Hall, 
Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, 3060 VLSB, 
Berkeley, CA 94720-3140, USA.

Phylodynamic methods reveal the spatial and temporal dynamics of viral 
geographic spread, and have featured prominently in studies of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Virtually all such studies are based on phylodynamic models that 
assume-despite direct and compelling evidence to the contrary-that rates of 
viral geographic dispersal are constant through time. Here, we: (1) extend 
phylodynamic models to allow both the average and relative rates of viral 
dispersal to vary independently between pre-specified time intervals; (2) 
implement methods to infer the number and timing of viral dispersal events 
between areas; and (3) develop statistics to assess the absolute fit of 
discrete-geographic phylodynamic models to empirical datasets. We first validate 
our new methods using simulations, and then apply them to a SARS-CoV-2 dataset 
from the early phase of the COVID-19 pandemic. We show that: (1) under 
simulation, failure to accommodate interval-specific variation in the study data 
will severely bias parameter estimates; (2) in practice, our interval-specific 
discrete-geographic phylodynamic models can significantly improve the relative 
and absolute fit to empirical data; and (3) the increased realism of our 
interval-specific models provides qualitatively different inferences regarding 
key aspects of the COVID-19 pandemic-revealing significant temporal variation in 
global viral dispersal rates, viral dispersal routes, and the number of viral 
dispersal events between areas-and alters interpretations regarding the efficacy 
of intervention measures to mitigate the pandemic.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac159
PMCID: PMC9384482
PMID: 35861314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


503. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac158. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac158.

Uncovering Signals of Positive Selection in Peruvian Populations from Three 
Ecological Regions.

Caro-Consuegra R(1), Nieves-Colón MA(2)(3)(4), Rawls E(3), Rubin-de-Celis V(5), 
Lizárraga B(6), Vidaurre T(7), Sandoval K(2), Fejerman L(8), Stone AC(3)(9), 
Moreno-Estrada A(2), Bosch E(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology (UPF-CSIC), Department of Medicine and Life 
Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 08003, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la Biodiversidad, Unidad de Genómica 
Avanzada (UGA-LANGEBIO), CINVESTAV, Irapuato, Guanajuato 36821, Mexico.
(3)School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ 85287, USA.
(4)Department of Anthropology, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, 
MN 55455, USA.
(5)Laboratorio de Genómica Molecular Evolutiva, Instituto de Ciencia y 
Tecnología, Universidad Ricardo Palma, Lima 33, Ap 1801, Peru.
(6)Emeritus Professor, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional 
Mayor de San Marcos, 15081 Lima, Peru.
(7)Instituto de Enfermedades Neoplásicas, 15038 Surquillo, Lima, Peru.
(8)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of California Davis, Davis, 
CA 95616, USA.
(9)Center for Evolution and Medicine, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 
85287-4501, USA.
(10)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), 43206 
Reus, Spain.

Peru hosts extremely diverse ecosystems which can be broadly classified into the 
following three major ecoregions: the Pacific desert coast, the Andean 
highlands, and the Amazon rainforest. Since its initial peopling approximately 
12,000 years ago, the populations inhabiting such ecoregions might have 
differentially adapted to their contrasting environmental pressures. Previous 
studies have described several candidate genes underlying adaptation to 
hypobaric hypoxia among Andean highlanders. However, the adaptive genetic 
diversity of coastal and rainforest populations has been less studied. Here, we 
gathered genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphism-array data from 286 
Peruvians living across the three ecoregions and analyzed signals of recent 
positive selection through population differentiation and haplotype-based 
selection scans. Among highland populations, we identify candidate genes related 
to cardiovascular function (TLL1, DUSP27, TBX5, PLXNA4, SGCD), to the 
Hypoxia-Inducible Factor pathway (TGFA, APIP), to skin pigmentation (MITF), as 
well as to glucose (GLIS3) and glycogen metabolism (PPP1R3C, GANC). In contrast, 
most signatures of adaptation in coastal and rainforest populations comprise 
candidate genes related to the immune system (including SIGLEC8, TRIM21, CD44, 
and ICAM1 in the coast; CBLB and PRDM1 in the rainforest; and BRD2, HLA-DOA, 
HLA-DPA1 regions in both), possibly as a result of strong pathogen-driven 
selection. This study identifies candidate genes related to human adaptation to 
the diverse environments of South America.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac158
PMCID: PMC9356722
PMID: 35860855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


504. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac157. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac157.

The Codon Statistics Database: A Database of Codon Usage Bias.

Subramanian K(1), Payne B(1), Feyertag F(1), Alvarez-Ponce D(1).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557, USA.

We present the Codon Statistics Database, an online database that contains codon 
usage statistics for all the species with reference or representative genomes in 
RefSeq (over 15,000). The user can search for any species and access two sets of 
tables. One set lists, for each codon, the frequency, the Relative Synonymous 
Codon Usage, and whether the codon is preferred. Another set of tables lists, 
for each gene, its GC content, Effective Number of Codons, Codon Adaptation 
Index, and frequency of optimal codons. Equivalent tables can be accessed for 
(1) all nuclear genes, (2) nuclear genes encoding ribosomal proteins, (3) 
mitochondrial genes, and (4) chloroplast genes (if available in the relevant 
assembly). The user can also search for any taxonomic group (e.g., "primates") 
and obtain a table comparing all the species in the group. The database is free 
to access without registration at http://codonstatsdb.unr.edu.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac157
PMCID: PMC9372565
PMID: 35859338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac145. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac145.

Evolutionary History of Sexual Differentiation Mechanism in Insects.

Chikami Y(1)(2), Okuno M(3), Toyoda A(4)(5), Itoh T(6), Niimi T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolutionary Developmental Biology, National Institute for Basic 
Biology, 38 Nishigonaka, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8585, Japan.
(2)Department of Basic Biology, School of Life Science, The Graduate University 
for Advanced Studies, SOKENDAI, 38 Nishigonaka, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 
444-8585, Japan.
(3)Division of Microbiology, Department of Infectious Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Kurume University, 67 Asahi-machi, Kurume, Fukuoka, 830-0011, Japan.
(4)Comparative Genomics Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata, 
Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.
(5)Advanced Genomics Center, National Institute of Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima, 
Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan.
(6)School of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 
Ookayama, Meguro, Tokyo 152-8550, Japan.

Alternative splicing underpins functional diversity in proteins and the 
complexity and diversity of eukaryotes. An example is the doublesex gene, the 
key transcriptional factor in arthropod sexual differentiation. doublesex is 
controlled by sex-specific splicing and promotes both male and female 
differentiation in holometabolan insects, whereas in hemimetabolan species, 
doublesex has sex-specific isoforms but is not required for female 
differentiation. How doublesex evolved to be essential for female development 
remains largely unknown. Here, we investigate ancestral states of doublesex 
using Thermobia domestica belonging to Zygentoma, the sister group of Pterygota, 
that is, winged insects. We find that, in T. domestica, doublesex expresses 
sex-specific isoforms but is only necessary for male differentiation of sexual 
morphology. This result supports the hypothesis that doublesex initially 
promoted male differentiation during insect evolution. However, T. domestica 
doublesex has a short female-specific region and upregulates the expression of 
vitellogenin homologs in females, suggesting that doublesex may already play 
some role in female morphogenesis of the common ancestor of Pterygota. 
Reconstruction of the ancestral sequence and prediction of protein structures 
show that the female-specific isoform of doublesex has an extended C-terminal 
disordered region in holometabolan insects but not in nonholometabolan species. 
We propose that doublesex acquired its function in female morphogenesis through 
a change in the protein motif structure rather than the emergence of the 
female-specific exon.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac145
PMCID: PMC9290531
PMID: 35820410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac154. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac154.

Variational Phylodynamic Inference Using Pandemic-scale Data.

Ki C(1), Terhorst J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

The ongoing global pandemic has sharply increased the amount of data available 
to researchers in epidemiology and public health. Unfortunately, few existing 
analysis tools are capable of exploiting all of the information contained in a 
pandemic-scale data set, resulting in missed opportunities for improved 
surveillance and contact tracing. In this paper, we develop the variational 
Bayesian skyline (VBSKY), a method for fitting Bayesian phylodynamic models to 
very large pathogen genetic data sets. By combining recent advances in 
phylodynamic modeling, scalable Bayesian inference and differentiable 
programming, along with a few tailored heuristics, VBSKY is capable of analyzing 
thousands of genomes in a few minutes, providing accurate estimates of 
epidemiologically relevant quantities such as the effective reproduction number 
and overall sampling effort through time. We illustrate the utility of our 
method by performing a rapid analysis of a large number of SARS-CoV-2 genomes, 
and demonstrate that the resulting estimates closely track those derived from 
alternative sources of public health data.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac154
PMCID: PMC9348775
PMID: 35816422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


507. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac155. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac155.

Expanded Dataset Reveals the Emergence and Evolution of DNA Gyrase in Archaea.

Villain P(1), Catchpole R(1), Forterre P(1)(2), Oberto J(1), da Cunha V(1), 
Basta T(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the 
Cell (I2BC), 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Archaeal Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

DNA gyrase is a type II topoisomerase with the unique capacity to introduce 
negative supercoiling in DNA. In bacteria, DNA gyrase has an essential role in 
the homeostatic regulation of supercoiling. While ubiquitous in bacteria, DNA 
gyrase was previously reported to have a patchy distribution in Archaea but its 
emergent function and evolutionary history in this domain of life remains 
elusive. In this study, we used phylogenomic approaches and an up-to date 
sequence dataset to establish global and archaea-specific phylogenies of DNA 
gyrases. The most parsimonious evolutionary scenario infers that DNA gyrase was 
introduced into the lineage leading to Euryarchaeal group II via a single 
horizontal gene transfer from a bacterial donor which we identified as an 
ancestor of Gracilicutes and/or Terrabacteria. The archaea-focused trees 
indicate that DNA gyrase spread from Euryarchaeal group II to some DPANN and 
Asgard lineages via rare horizontal gene transfers. The analysis of successful 
recent transfers suggests a requirement for syntropic or symbiotic/parasitic 
relationship between donor and recipient organisms. We further show that the 
ubiquitous archaeal Topoisomerase VI may have co-evolved with DNA gyrase to 
allow the division of labor in the management of topological constraints. 
Collectively, our study reveals the evolutionary history of DNA gyrase in 
Archaea and provides testable hypotheses to understand the prerequisites for 
successful establishment of DNA gyrase in a naive archaeon and the associated 
adaptations in the management of topological constraints.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac155
PMCID: PMC9348778
PMID: 35811376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


508. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac151. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac151.

Evolution of Human-Specific Alleles Protecting Cognitive Function of 
Grandmothers.

Saha S(1), Khan N(1), Comi T(2), Verhagen A(1), Sasmal A(1), Diaz S(1), Yu H(3), 
Chen X(3), Akey JM(2), Frank M(4), Gagneux P(1), Varki A(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, Pathology, Anthropology and Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, Center for Academic Research and Training in Anthropogeny and 
Glycobiology Research and Training Center, University of California San Diego, 
San Diego, CA 92093, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of California Davis, Davis, CA 95616, 
USA.
(4)Biognos AB, Gothenburg SE-402 74, Sweden.

The myelomonocytic receptor CD33 (Siglec-3) inhibits innate immune reactivity by 
extracellular V-set domain recognition of sialic acid (Sia)-containing 
"self-associated molecular patterns" (SAMPs). We earlier showed that V-set 
domain-deficient CD33-variant allele, protective against late-onset Alzheimer's 
Disease (LOAD), is derived and specific to the hominin lineage. We now report 
multiple hominin-specific CD33 V-set domain mutations. Due to hominin-specific, 
fixed loss-of-function mutation in the CMAH gene, humans lack 
N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), the preferred Sia-ligand of ancestral CD33. 
Mutational analysis and molecular dynamics (MD)-simulations indicate that fixed 
change in amino acid 21 of hominin V-set domain and conformational changes 
related to His45 corrected for Neu5Gc-loss by switching to N-acetylneuraminic 
acid (Neu5Ac)-recognition. We show that human-specific pathogens Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae and Group B Streptococcus selectively bind human CD33 (huCD33) as 
part of immune-evasive molecular mimicry of host SAMPs and that this binding is 
significantly impacted by amino acid 21 modification. In addition to 
LOAD-protective CD33 alleles, humans harbor derived, population-universal, 
cognition-protective variants at several other loci. Interestingly, 11 of 13 
SNPs in these human genes (including CD33) are not shared by genomes of archaic 
hominins: Neanderthals and Denisovans. We present a plausible evolutionary 
scenario to compile, correlate, and comprehend existing knowledge about 
huCD33-evolution and suggest that grandmothering emerged in humans.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac151
PMCID: PMC9356730
PMID: 35809046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


509. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac153. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac153.

Pseudofinder: Detection of Pseudogenes in Prokaryotic Genomes.

Syberg-Olsen MJ(1), Garber AI(2), Keeling PJ(1), McCutcheon JP(2)(3), Husnik 
F(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 4000 Jones Bridge Road, Chevy Chase, MD, 
USA.
(4)Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Okinawa, Japan.

Prokaryotic genomes are usually densely packed with intact and functional genes. 
However, in certain contexts, such as after recent ecological shifts or extreme 
population bottlenecks, broken and nonfunctional gene fragments can quickly 
accumulate and form a substantial fraction of the genome. Identification of 
these broken genes, called pseudogenes, is a critical step for understanding the 
evolutionary forces acting upon, and the functional potential encoded within, 
prokaryotic genomes. Here, we present Pseudofinder, an open-source software 
dedicated to pseudogene identification and analysis in bacterial and archaeal 
genomes. We demonstrate that Pseudofinder's multi-pronged, reference-based 
approach can detect a wide variety of pseudogenes, including those that are 
highly degraded and typically missed by gene-calling pipelines, as well newly 
formed pseudogenes containing only one or a few inactivating mutations. 
Additionally, Pseudofinder can detect genes that lack inactivating substitutions 
but experiencing relaxed selection. Implementation of Pseudofinder in annotation 
pipelines will allow more precise estimations of the functional potential of 
sequenced microbes, while also generating new hypotheses related to the 
evolutionary dynamics of bacterial and archaeal genomes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac153
PMCID: PMC9336565
PMID: 35801562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


510. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac148. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac148.

Evolution of Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF)-like and Zona Pellucida Domains 
Containing Shell Matrix Proteins in Mollusks.

Shimizu K(1), Takeuchi T(2), Negishi L(3), Kurumizaka H(3), Kuriyama I(4), Endo 
K(5), Suzuki M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8657, 
Japan.
(2)Marine Genomics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate 
University, Onna, Okinawa, Japan.
(3)Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, 
Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
(4)Mie Prefecture Fisheries Research Institute, 3564-3 Hamajima, Hamajima-cho, 
Shima City, Mie 517-0404, Japan.
(5)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 
Hongo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Several types of shell matrix proteins (SMPs) have been identified in molluskan 
shells. Their diversity is the consequence of various molecular processes, 
including domain shuffling and gene duplication. However, the evolutionary 
origin of most SMPs remains unclear. In this study, we investigated the 
evolutionary process EGF-like and zona pellucida (ZP) domains containing SMPs. 
Two types of the proteins (EGF-like protein (EGFL) and EGF-like and ZP domains 
containing protein (EGFZP)) were found in the pearl oyster, Pinctada fucata. In 
contrast, only EGFZP was identified in the gastropods. Phylogenetic analysis and 
genomic arrangement studies showed that EGFL and EGFZP formed a clade in 
bivalves, and their encoding genes were localized in tandem repeats on the same 
scaffold. In P. fucata, EGFL genes were expressed in the outer part of mantle 
epithelial cells are related to the calcitic shell formation. However, in both 
P. fucata and the limpet Nipponacmea fuscoviridis, EGFZP genes were expressed in 
the inner part of the mantle epithelial cells are related to aragonitic shell 
formation. Furthermore, our analysis showed that in P. fucata, the ZP domain 
interacts with eight SMPs that have various functions in the nacreous shell 
mineralization. The data suggest that the ZP domain can interact with other 
SMPs, and EGFL evolution in pterimorph bivalves represents an example of 
neo-functionalization that involves the acquisition of a novel protein through 
gene duplication.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac148
PMCID: PMC9290575
PMID: 35796746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


511. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac149. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac149.

The Elephant Evolved p53 Isoforms that Escape MDM2-Mediated Repression and 
Cancer.

Padariya M(1), Jooste ML(2), Hupp T(2), Fåhraeus R(1)(3)(4)(5), Vojtesek B(4), 
Vollrath F(6)(7), Kalathiya U(1), Karakostis K(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)International Centre for Cancer Vaccine Science, University of Gdansk, ul. 
Kładki 24, Gdansk, Poland.
(2)Institute of Genetics and Cancer, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)Inserm UMRS1131, Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, Université Paris 7, 
Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.
(4)Research Centre for Applied Molecular Oncology (RECAMO), Masaryk Memorial 
Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Medical Biosciences, Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(6)Department of Zoology, Zoology Research and Administration Building, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(7)Save the Elephants Marula Manor, Marula Lane, Karen P.O. Box 54667, Nairobi, 
Kenya.
(8)Institut de Biotecnologia i de Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Bellaterra (Barcelona), Spain.

The p53 tumor suppressor is a transcription factor with roles in cell 
development, apoptosis, oncogenesis, aging, and homeostasis in response to 
stresses and infections. p53 is tightly regulated by the MDM2 E3 ubiquitin 
ligase. The p53-MDM2 pathway has coevolved, with MDM2 remaining largely 
conserved, whereas the TP53 gene morphed into various isoforms. Studies on 
prevertebrate ancestral homologs revealed the transition from an environmentally 
induced mechanism activating p53 to a tightly regulated system involving cell 
signaling. The evolution of this mechanism depends on structural changes in the 
interacting protein motifs. Elephants such as Loxodonta africana constitute 
ideal models to investigate this coevolution as they are large and long-living 
as well as having 20 copies of TP53 isoformic sequences expressing a variety of 
BOX-I MDM2-binding motifs. Collectively, these isoforms would enhance 
sensitivity to cellular stresses, such as DNA damage, presumably accounting for 
strong cancer defenses and other adaptations favoring healthy aging. Here we 
investigate the molecular evolution of the p53-MDM2 system by combining in 
silico modeling and in vitro assays to explore structural and functional aspects 
of p53 isoforms retaining the MDM2 interaction, whereas forming distinct pools 
of cell signaling. The methodology used demonstrates, for the first time that in 
silico docking simulations can be used to explore functional aspects of elephant 
p53 isoforms. Our observations elucidate structural and mechanistic aspects of 
p53 regulation, facilitate understanding of complex cell signaling, and suggest 
testable hypotheses of p53 evolution referencing Peto's Paradox.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac149
PMCID: PMC9279639
PMID: 35792674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


512. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac144. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac144.

Consequences of Substitution Model Selection on Protein Ancestral Sequence 
Reconstruction.

Del Amparo R(1)(2), Arenas M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)CINBIO, Universidade de Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Bioquímica, Xenética e Immunoloxía, Universidade de Vigo, 
Vigo, Spain.
(3)Galicia Sur Health Research Institute (IIS Galicia Sur), Vigo, Spain.

The selection of the best-fitting substitution model of molecular evolution is a 
traditional step for phylogenetic inferences, including ancestral sequence 
reconstruction (ASR). However, a few recent studies suggested that applying this 
procedure does not affect the accuracy of phylogenetic tree reconstruction. 
Here, we revisited this debate topic by analyzing the influence of selection 
among substitution models of protein evolution, with focus on exchangeability 
matrices, on the accuracy of ASR using simulated and real data. We found that 
the selected best-fitting substitution model produces the most accurate 
ancestral sequences, especially if the data present large genetic diversity. 
Indeed, ancestral sequences reconstructed under substitution models with similar 
exchangeability matrices were similar, suggesting that if the selected 
best-fitting model cannot be used for the reconstruction, applying a model 
similar to the selected one is preferred. We conclude that selecting among 
substitution models of protein evolution is recommended for reconstructing 
accurate ancestral sequences.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac144
PMCID: PMC9254009
PMID: 35789388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


513. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac134. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac134.

Warthog Genomes Resolve an Evolutionary Conundrum and Reveal Introgression of 
Disease Resistance Genes.

Garcia-Erill G(1), Jørgensen CHF(1), Muwanika VB(2), Wang X(1), Rasmussen MS(1), 
de Jong YA(3), Gaubert P(4), Olayemi A(5), Salmona J(4), Butynski TM(3), Bertola 
LD(1), Siegismund HR(1), Albrechtsen A(1), Heller R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 
Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(2)Department of Environmental Management, Makerere University, PO Box 7062, 
Kampala, Uganda.
(3)Eastern Africa Primate Diversity and Conservation Program & Lolldaiga Hills 
Research Programme, PO Box 149, Nanyuki 10400, Kenya.
(4)Laboratoire Évolution & Diversité Biologique, Université Toulouse III Paul 
Sabatier, 31062 Toulouse, France.
(5)Natural History Museum, Obafemi Awolowo University, HO 220005 Ile Ife, 
Nigeria.

African wild pigs have a contentious evolutionary and biogeographic history. 
Until recently, desert warthog (Phacochoerus aethiopicus) and common warthog (P. 
africanus) were considered a single species. Molecular evidence surprisingly 
suggested they diverged at least 4.4 million years ago, and possibly outside of 
Africa. We sequenced the first whole-genomes of four desert warthogs and 35 
common warthogs from throughout their range. We show that these two species 
diverged much later than previously estimated, 400,000-1,700,000 years ago 
depending on assumptions of gene flow. This brings it into agreement with the 
paleontological record. We found that the common warthog originated in western 
Africa and subsequently colonized eastern and southern Africa. During this range 
expansion, the common warthog interbred with the desert warthog, presumably in 
eastern Africa, underlining this region's importance in African biogeography. We 
found that immune system-related genes may have adaptively introgressed into 
common warthogs, indicating that resistance to novel diseases was one of the 
most potent drivers of evolution as common warthogs expanded their range. Hence, 
we solve some of the key controversies surrounding warthog evolution and reveal 
a complex evolutionary history involving range expansion, introgression, and 
adaptation to new diseases.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac134
PMCID: PMC9250280
PMID: 35779009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


514. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac150. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac150.

Sympatric Recombination in Zoonotic Cryptosporidium Leads to Emergence of 
Populations with Modified Host Preference.

Wang T(1), Guo Y(2), Roellig DM(3), Li N(2), Santín M(4), Lombard J(5), Kváč 
M(6), Naguib D(7), Zhang Z(1), Feng Y(2), Xiao L(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Center for Emerging and 
Zoonotic Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Environmental Microbial and Food Safety Laboratory, Beltsville Agricultural 
Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, 
Beltsville, MD, USA.
(5)Center for Epidemiology and Animal Health, Veterinary Services, Animal and 
Plant Health Inspection Service, US Department of Agriculture, Fort Collins, CO, 
USA.
(6)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, 
Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
(7)Department of Hygiene and Zoonoses, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura 
University, Mansoura, Egypt.

Genetic recombination plays a critical role in the emergence of pathogens with 
phenotypes such as drug resistance, virulence, and host adaptation. Here, we 
tested the hypothesis that recombination between sympatric ancestral populations 
leads to the emergence of divergent variants of the zoonotic parasite 
Cryptosporidium parvum with modified host ranges. Comparative genomic analyses 
of 101 isolates have identified seven subpopulations isolated by distance. They 
appear to be descendants of two ancestral populations, IIa in northwestern 
Europe and IId from southwestern Asia. Sympatric recombination in areas with 
both ancestral subtypes and subsequent selective sweeps have led to the 
emergence of new subpopulations with mosaic genomes and modified host 
preference. Subtelomeric genes could be involved in the adaptive selection of 
subpopulations, while copy number variations of genes encoding 
invasion-associated proteins are potentially associated with modified host 
ranges. These observations reveal ancestral origins of zoonotic C. parvum and 
suggest that pathogen import through modern animal farming might promote the 
emergence of divergent subpopulations of C. parvum with modified host 
preference.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac150
PMCID: PMC9317183
PMID: 35776423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


515. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac147. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac147.

De novo Mutations in Domestic Cat are Consistent with an Effect of Reproductive 
Longevity on Both the Rate and Spectrum of Mutations.

Wang RJ(1), Raveendran M(2)(3), Harris RA(2)(3), Murphy WJ(4), Lyons LA(5), 
Rogers J(2)(3), Hahn MW(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
(2)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(5)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
(6)Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.

The mutation rate is a fundamental evolutionary parameter with direct and 
appreciable effects on the health and function of individuals. Here, we examine 
this important parameter in the domestic cat, a beloved companion animal as well 
as a valuable biomedical model. We estimate a mutation rate of 0.86 × 10-8 per 
bp per generation for the domestic cat (at an average parental age of 3.8 
years). We find evidence for a significant paternal age effect, with more 
mutations transmitted by older sires. Our analyses suggest that the cat and the 
human have accrued similar numbers of mutations in the germline before reaching 
sexual maturity. The per-generation mutation rate in the cat is 28% lower than 
what has been observed in humans, but is consistent with the shorter generation 
time in the cat. Using a model of reproductive longevity, which takes into 
account differences in the reproductive age and time to sexual maturity, we are 
able to explain much of the difference in per-generation rates between species. 
We further apply our reproductive longevity model in a novel analysis of 
mutation spectra and find that the spectrum for the cat resembles the human 
mutation spectrum at a younger age of reproduction. Together, these results 
implicate changes in life-history as a driver of mutation rate evolution between 
species. As the first direct observation of the paternal age effect outside of 
rodents and primates, our results also suggest a phenomenon that may be 
universal among mammals.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac147
PMCID: PMC9290555
PMID: 35771663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


516. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac138. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac138.

Neofunctionalization of a Noncoding Portion of a DNA Transposon in the Coding 
Region of the Chimerical Sex-Determining Gene dm-W in Xenopus Frogs.

Hayashi S(1), Suda K(1), Fujimura F(1), Fujikawa M(1), Tamura K(1), Tsukamoto 
D(1), Evans BJ(2), Takamatsu N(1), Ito M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience, School of Science, Kitasato University, 1-15-1 
Kitasato, Minamiku Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0373, Japan.
(2)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Life Sciences Room 328, 1280 Main 
Street West, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8S 4K1.

Most vertebrate sex-determining genes (SDGs) emerge as neofunctionalized genes 
through duplication and/or mutation of ancestral genes that are involved with 
sexual differentiation. We previously demonstrated dm-W to be the SDG in the 
African clawed frog Xenopus laevis and found that a portion of this gene emerged 
from the masculinization gene dmrt1 after allotetraploidization by interspecific 
hybridization between two ancestral species around 17-18 Ma. dm-W has four exons 
consisting of a noncoding exon 1, dmrt1-derived exons 2 and 3, and an orphan 
exon 4 (Ex4) of unknown origin that includes coding sequence (CDS). In this 
study, we searched for the origin of Ex4 and investigated the function of the 
CDS of this exon. We found that the Ex4-CDS is derived from a noncoding portion 
of the hAT-10 family of DNA transposon. Evolutionary analysis of transposons and 
determination of the Ex4 sequences from three other species indicated that Ex4 
was generated before the diversification of most or all extant allotetraploid 
species in subgenus Xenopus, during which time we hypothesize that transposase 
activity of this hAT superfamily was active. Using DNA-protein binding and 
transfection assays, we further demonstrate that the Ex4-encoded amino acid 
sequence increases the DNA-binding ability and transrepression activity of DM-W. 
These findings suggest that the conversion of the noncoding transposon sequence 
to the CDS of dm-W contributed to neofunctionalization of a new chimeric SDG in 
the ancestor of the allotetraploid Xenopus species, offering new insights into 
de novo origin and functional evolution of chimerical genes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac138
PMCID: PMC9250109
PMID: 35763822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


517. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 28;39(6):msac128. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac128. Online 
ahead of print.

Duplication of horizontally acquired GH5_2 enzymes played a central role in the 
evolution of longhorned beetles.

Shin NR(1)(2), Doucet D(3), Pauchet Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Jena, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Insect Symbiosis, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, 
Jena, Germany.
(3)Great Lakes Forestry Centre, Natural Resources Canada, Canadian Forest 
Service, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, Canada.

The rise of functional diversity through gene duplication contributed to the 
adaption of organisms to various environments. Here we investigate the evolution 
of putative cellulases of the subfamily 2 of glycoside hydrolase family 5 
(GH5_2) in the Cerambycidae (longhorned beetles), a megadiverse assemblage of 
mostly xylophagous beetles. Cerambycidae originally acquired GH5_2 from a 
bacterial donor through horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and extant species 
harbor multiple copies that arose from gene duplication. We ask how these 
digestive enzymes contributed to the ability of these beetles to feed on wood. 
We analyzed 113 GH5_2, including the functional characterization of 52 of them, 
derived from 25 species covering most subfamilies of Cerambycidae. Ancestral 
gene duplications led to five well-defined groups with distinct substrate 
specificity, allowing these beetles to break down, in addition to cellulose, 
polysaccharides that are abundant in plant cell walls (PCWs), namely, 
xyloglucan, xylan, and mannans. Resurrecting the ancestral enzyme originally 
acquired by HGT, we show it was a cellulase that was able to break down 
glucomannan and xylan. Finally, recent gene duplications further expanded the 
catalytic repertoire of cerambycid GH5_2, giving rise to enzymes that favor 
transglycosylation over hydrolysis. We suggest that HGT and gene duplication, 
which shaped the evolution of GH5_2, played a central role in the ability of 
cerambycid beetles to use a PCW-rich diet and may have contributed to their 
successful radiation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac128
PMCID: PMC9246334
PMID: 35763818


518. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac136. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac136.

Accurate Identification of Subclones in Tumor Genomes.

Ahmadinejad N(1)(2), Troftgruben S(1), Wang J(1)(3), Chandrashekar PB(1)(2), 
Dinu V(1)(2), Maley C(2), Liu L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Health Solutions, Arizona State University, Phoenix, AZ 85054, 
USA.
(2)Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85281, USA.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research and Center for Individualized 
Medicine, Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA.

Understanding intratumor heterogeneity is critical for studying tumorigenesis 
and designing personalized treatments. To decompose the mixed cell population in 
a tumor, subclones are inferred computationally based on variant allele 
frequency (VAF) from bulk sequencing data. In this study, we showed that 
sequencing depth, mean VAF, and variance of VAF of a subclone are confounded. 
Without considering this effect, current methods require deep-sequencing data 
(>300× depth) to reliably infer subclones. Here, we present a novel algorithm 
that incorporates depth-variance and mean-variance dependencies in a clustering 
error model and successfully identifies subclones in tumors sequenced at depths 
of as low as 30×. We implemented the algorithm as a model-based adaptive 
grouping of subclones (MAGOS) method. Analyses of computer simulated data and 
empirical sequencing data showed that MAGOS outperformed existing methods on 
minimum sequencing depth, decomposition accuracy, and computation efficiency. 
The most prominent improvements were observed in analyzing tumors sequenced at 
depths between 30× and 200×, whereas the performance was comparable between 
MAGOS and existing methods on deeply sequenced tumors. MAGOS supports analysis 
of single-nucleotide variants and copy number variants from a single sample or 
multiple samples of a tumor. We applied MAGOS to whole-exome data of late-stage 
liver cancers and discovered that high subclone count in a tumor was a 
significant risk factor of poor prognosis. Lastly, our analysis suggested that 
sequencing multiple samples of the same tumor at standard depth is more 
cost-effective and robust for subclone characterization than deep sequencing a 
single sample. MAGOS is available at github (https://github.com/liliulab/magos).

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac136
PMCID: PMC9260306
PMID: 35749590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


519. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac146. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac146.

Evolution of miRNA-Binding Sites and Regulatory Networks in Cichlids.

Mehta TK(1), Penso-Dolfin L(2), Nash W(1), Roy S(3)(4)(5), Di-Palma F(6)(7), 
Haerty W(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Regulatory and Systems Genomics, Earlham Institute (EI), Norwich, UK.
(2)Bioinformatics Department, Silence Therapeutics GmbH, Robert-Rössle-Straße 
10, Germany.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, UW Madison, Madison, WI, 
USA.
(4)Roy Lab, Wisconsin Institute for Discovery (WID), Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Computer Sciences, UW Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(6)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(7)Research and Innovation, Genome British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The divergence of regulatory regions and gene regulatory network (GRN) rewiring 
is a key driver of cichlid phenotypic diversity. However, the contribution of 
miRNA-binding site turnover has yet to be linked to GRN evolution across 
cichlids. Here, we extend our previous studies by analyzing the selective 
constraints driving evolution of miRNA and transcription factor (TF)-binding 
sites of target genes, to infer instances of cichlid GRN rewiring associated 
with regulatory binding site turnover. Comparative analyses identified increased 
species-specific networks that are functionally associated to traits of cichlid 
phenotypic diversity. The evolutionary rewiring is associated with differential 
models of miRNA- and TF-binding site turnover, driven by a high proportion of 
fast-evolving polymorphic sites in adaptive trait genes compared with subsets of 
random genes. Positive selection acting upon discrete mutations in these 
regulatory regions is likely to be an important mechanism in rewiring GRNs in 
rapidly radiating cichlids. Regulatory variants of functionally associated 
miRNA- and TF-binding sites of visual opsin genes differentially segregate 
according to phylogeny and ecology of Lake Malawi species, identifying both 
rewired, for example, clade-specific and conserved network motifs of adaptive 
trait associated GRNs. Our approach revealed several novel candidate regulators, 
regulatory regions, and three-node motifs across cichlid genomes with previously 
reported associations to known adaptive evolutionary traits.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac146
PMCID: PMC9260339
PMID: 35748824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


520. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Aug 3;39(8):msac143. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac143.

Accounting for Errors in Data Improves Divergence Time Estimates in Single-cell 
Cancer Evolution.

Chen K(1), Moravec JC(2)(3), Gavryushkin A(3), Welch D(1), Drummond AJ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(3)School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, 
New Zealand.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Single-cell sequencing provides a new way to explore the evolutionary history of 
cells. Compared to traditional bulk sequencing, where a population of 
heterogeneous cells is pooled to form a single observation, single-cell 
sequencing isolates and amplifies genetic material from individual cells, 
thereby preserving the information about the origin of the sequences. However, 
single-cell data are more error-prone than bulk sequencing data due to the 
limited genomic material available per cell. Here, we present error and mutation 
models for evolutionary inference of single-cell data within a mature and 
extensible Bayesian framework, BEAST2. Our framework enables integration with 
biologically informative models such as relaxed molecular clocks and population 
dynamic models. Our simulations show that modeling errors increase the accuracy 
of relative divergence times and substitution parameters. We reconstruct the 
phylogenetic history of a colorectal cancer patient and a healthy patient from 
single-cell DNA sequencing data. We find that the estimated times of terminal 
splitting events are shifted forward in time compared to models which ignore 
errors. We observed that not accounting for errors can overestimate the 
phylogenetic diversity in single-cell DNA sequencing data. We estimate that 
30-50% of the apparent diversity can be attributed to error. Our work enables a 
full Bayesian approach capable of accounting for errors in the data within the 
integrative Bayesian software framework BEAST2.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac143
PMCID: PMC9356729
PMID: 35733333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


521. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac141. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac141.

The Transposition Rate Has Little Influence on the Plateauing Level of the 
P-element.

Kofler R(1), Nolte V(1), Schlötterer C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Populationsgenetik, Vetmeduni Vienna, Veterinärplatz 1, 1210 
Wien, Austria.

The popular trap model assumes that the invasions of transposable elements (TEs) 
in mammals and invertebrates are stopped by piRNAs that emerge after insertion 
of the TE into a piRNA cluster. It remains, however, still unclear which factors 
influence the dynamics of TE invasions. The activity of the TE (i.e., 
transposition rate) is one frequently discussed key factor. Here we take 
advantage of the temperature-dependent activity of the P-element, a widely 
studied eukaryotic TE, to test how TE activity affects the dynamics of a TE 
invasion. We monitored P-element invasion dynamics in experimental Drosophila 
simulans populations at hot and cold culture conditions. Despite marked 
differences in transposition rates, the P-element reached very similar copy 
numbers at both temperatures. The reduction of the insertion rate upon 
approaching the copy number plateau was accompanied by similar amounts of piRNAs 
against the P-element at both temperatures. Nevertheless, we also observed fewer 
P-element insertions in piRNA clusters than expected, which is not compatible 
with a simple trap model. The ping-pong cycle, which degrades TE transcripts, 
becomes typically active after the copy number plateaued. We generated a model, 
with few parameters, that largely captures the observed invasion dynamics. We 
conclude that the transposition rate has at the most only a minor influence on 
TE abundance, but other factors, such as paramutations or selection against TE 
insertions are shaping the TE composition.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac141
PMCID: PMC9254008
PMID: 35731857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


522. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac142. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac142.

Simplexviruses Successfully Adapt to Their Host by Fine-Tuning Immune Responses.

Mozzi A(1), Cagliani R(1), Pontremoli C(1), Forni D(1), Saulle I(2)(3), 
Saresella M(4), Pozzoli U(1), Cappelletti G(2), Vantaggiato C(5), Clerici 
M(3)(4), Biasin M(2), Sironi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Institute, IRCCS E. MEDEA, Bioinformatics, 23842 Bosisio Parini, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "L. Sacco", University of 
Milan, 20157 Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Physiopathology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 20090 
Milan, Italy.
(4)Don C. Gnocchi Foundation ONLUS, IRCCS, Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and 
Biotechnology, 20148 Milan, Italy.
(5)Scientific Institute, IRCCS E. MEDEA, Laboratory of Molecular Biology, 23842 
Bosisio Parini, Italy.

Primate herpes simplex viruses are species-specific and relatively harmless to 
their natural hosts. However, cross-species transmission is often associated 
with severe disease, as exemplified by the virulence of macacine herpesvirus 1 
(B virus) in humans. We performed a genome-wide scan for signals of adaptation 
of simplexviruses to their hominin hosts. Among core genes, we found evidence of 
episodic positive selection in three glycoproteins, with several selected sites 
located in antigenic determinants. Positively selected noncore genes were found 
to be involved in different immune-escape mechanisms. The herpes simplex virus 
(HSV)-1/HSV-2 encoded product (ICP47) of one of these genes is known to 
down-modulate major histocompatibility complex class I expression. This feature 
is not shared with B virus, which instead up-regulates Human Leukocyte Antigen 
(HLA)-G, an immunomodulatory molecule. By in vitro expression of different ICP47 
mutants, we functionally characterized the selection signals. Results indicated 
that the selected sites do not represent the sole determinants of binding to the 
transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP). Conversely, the amino acid 
status at these sites was sufficient to determine HLA-G up-regulation. In fact, 
both HSV-1 and HSV-2 ICP47 induced HLA-G when mutated to recapitulate residues 
in B virus, whereas the mutated version of B virus ICP47 failed to determine 
HLA-G expression. These differences might contribute to the severity of B virus 
infection in humans. Importantly, they indicate that the evolution of ICP47 in 
HSV-1/HSV-2 led to the loss of an immunosuppressive effect. Thus, related 
simplexviruses finely tune the balance between immunosuppressive and 
immunostimulatory pathways to promote successful co-existence with their primate 
hosts.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac142
PMCID: PMC9250107
PMID: 35731846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


523. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 21;39(6):msac125. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac125. Online 
ahead of print.

Human follicular mites: Ectoparasites becoming symbionts.

Smith G(1), Manzano Marín A(2), Reyes-Prieto M(3)(4), Ribeiro Antunes CS(1)(5), 
Ashworth V(1), Goselle ON(1)(6), Jan AAA(1)(7), Moya A(3)(4)(8), Latorre 
A(3)(4)(9), Perotti MA(10), Braig HR(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, Wales, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Microbiology and Environmental Systems Science (CMESS), University 
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Institute of Integrative Systems Biology (I2Sysbio), Universitat de València 
and Spanish Research Concil (CSIC), València, Spain.
(4)Foundation for the Promotion of Health and Biomedical Research of the 
Valencian Community (FISABIO), València, Spain.
(5)Present address: School of Biological Sciences, University of Reading, 
Reading, United Kingdom.
(6)Present address: Applied Entomology and Parasitology Unit, Department of 
Zoology, University of Jos, Jos, Nigeria.
(7)Present address: Laboratory and Blood Bank, King Fahad General Hospital, 
Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Center for Networked Biomedical Research in Epidemiology and Public Health 
(CIBEResp), Madrid, Spain.
(9)Center for Networked Biomedical Research in Epidemiology and Public Health 
(CIBEResp), Madrid, Sain.
(10)School of Biological Sciences, University of Reading, Reading, United 
Kingdom.
(11)Institute and Museum of Natural Sciences, National University of San Juan, 
Argentina.

Most humans carry mites in the hair follicles of their skin for their entire 
lives. Follicular mites are the only metazoans tha continuously live on humans. 
We propose that Demodex folliculorum (Acari) represents a transitional stage 
from a host-injuring obligate parasite to an obligate symbiont. Here, we 
describe the profound impact of this transition on the genome and physiology of 
the mite. Genome sequencing revealed that the permanent host association of D. 
folliculorum led to an extensive genome reduction through relaxed selection and 
genetic drift, resulting in the smallest number of protein-coding genes yet 
identified among panarthropods. Confocal microscopy revealed that this gene loss 
coincided with an extreme reduction in the number of cells. Single uninucleate 
muscle cells are sufficient to operate each of the three segments that form each 
walking leg. While it has been assumed that the reduction of the cell number in 
parasites starts early in development, we identified a greater total number of 
cells in the last developmental stage (nymph) than in the terminal adult stage, 
suggesting that reduction starts at the adult or ultimate stage of development. 
This is the first evolutionary step in an arthropod species adopting a 
reductive, parasitic or endosymbiotic lifestyle. Somatic nuclei show 
underreplication at the diploid stage. Novel eye structures or photoreceptors as 
well as a unique human host melatonin-guided day/night rhythm are proposed for 
the first time. The loss of DNA repair genes coupled with extreme endogamy might 
have set this mite species on an evolutionary dead-end trajectory.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac125
PMCID: PMC9218549
PMID: 35724423


524. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac140. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac140.

Ancestrally Reconstructed von Willebrand Factor Reveals Evidence for Trench 
Warfare Coevolution between Opossums and Pit Vipers.

Drabeck DH(1)(2), Rucavado A(3), Hingst-Zaher E(4), Dean A(1), Jansa SA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior, University of Minnesota, 1479 
Gortner Ave., St Paul, MN 55108, USA.
(2)Bell Museum, University of Minnesota, 1987 Upper Buford Circle, St. Paul, MN 
55108, USA.
(3)Instituto Clodomiro Picado, Facultad de Microbiología, Universidad de Costa 
Rica, San José, Costa Rica.
(4)Museu Biológico, Instituto Butantan, CEP 05503-900 São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Opossums in the tribe Didelphini are resistant to pit viper venoms and are 
hypothesized to be coevolving with venomous snakes. Specifically, a protein 
involved in blood clotting (von Willebrand factor [vWF] which is targeted by 
snake venom C-type lectins [CTLs]) has been found to undergo rapid adaptive 
evolution in Didelphini. Several unique amino acid changes in vWF could explain 
their resistance; however, experimental evidence that these changes disrupt 
binding to venom CTLs was lacking. Furthermore, without explicit testing of 
ancestral phenotypes to reveal the mode of evolution, the assertion that this 
system represents an example of coevolution rather than noncoevolutionary 
adaptation remains unsupported. Using expressed vWF proteins and purified venom 
CTLs, we quantified binding affinity for vWF proteins from all resistant taxa, 
their venom-sensitive relatives, and their ancestors. We show that CTL-resistant 
vWF is present in opossums outside clade Didelphini and likely across a wider 
swath of opossums (family Didelphidae) than previously thought. Ancestral 
reconstruction and in vitro testing of vWF phenotypes in a clade of rapidly 
evolving opossums reveal a pattern consistent with trench warfare coevolution 
between opossums and their venomous snake prey.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac140
PMCID: PMC9255381
PMID: 35723968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


525. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac139. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac139.

A New Paradigm of Multiheme Cytochrome Evolution by Grafting and Pruning Protein 
Modules.

Soares R(1)(2), Costa NL(1), Paquete CM(1), Andreini C(3), Louro RO(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica António Xavier, Universidade Nova 
de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária e Veterinária, Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)Magnetic Resonance Center and Department of Chemistry, University of 
Florence, Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.

Multiheme cytochromes play key roles in diverse biogeochemical cycles, but 
understanding the origin and evolution of these proteins is a challenge due to 
their ancient origin and complex structure. Up until now, the evolution of 
multiheme cytochromes composed by multiple redox modules in a single polypeptide 
chain was proposed to occur by gene fusion events. In this context, the 
pentaheme nitrite reductase NrfA and the tetraheme cytochrome c554 were 
previously proposed to be at the origin of the extant octa- and nonaheme 
cytochrome c involved in metabolic pathways that contribute to the nitrogen, 
sulfur, and iron biogeochemical cycles by a gene fusion event. Here, we combine 
structural and character-based phylogenetic analysis with an unbiased root 
placement method to refine the evolutionary relationships between these 
multiheme cytochromes. The evidence show that NrfA and cytochrome c554 belong to 
different clades, which suggests that these two multiheme cytochromes are 
products of truncation of ancestral octaheme cytochromes related to extant 
octaheme nitrite reductase and MccA, respectively. From our phylogenetic 
analysis, the last common ancestor is predicted to be an octaheme cytochrome 
with nitrite reduction ability. Evolution from this octaheme framework led to 
the great diversity of extant multiheme cytochromes analyzed here by pruning and 
grafting of protein modules and hemes. By shedding light into the evolution of 
multiheme cytochromes that intervene in different biogeochemical cycles, this 
work contributes to our understanding about the interplay between biology and 
geochemistry across large time scales in the history of Earth.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac139
PMCID: PMC9250108
PMID: 35714268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


526. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac137. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac137.

Functional Divergence of the bag-of-marbles Gene in the Drosophila melanogaster 
Species Group.

Bubnell JE(1), Ulbing CKS(1), Fernandez Begne P(1), Aquadro CF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 
USA.

In Drosophila melanogaster, a key germline stem cell (GSC) differentiation 
factor, bag of marbles (bam) shows rapid bursts of amino acid fixations between 
sibling species D. melanogaster and Drosophila simulans, but not in the outgroup 
species Drosophila ananassae. Here, we test the null hypothesis that bam's 
differentiation function is conserved between D. melanogaster and four 
additional Drosophila species in the melanogaster species group spanning 
approximately 30 million years of divergence. Surprisingly, we demonstrate that 
bam is not necessary for oogenesis or spermatogenesis in Drosophila teissieri 
nor is bam necessary for spermatogenesis in D. ananassae. Remarkably bam 
function may change on a relatively short time scale. We further report tests of 
neutral sequence evolution at bam in additional species of Drosophila and find a 
positive, but not perfect, correlation between evidence for positive selection 
at bam and its essential role in GSC regulation and fertility for both males and 
females. Further characterization of bam function in more divergent lineages 
will be necessary to distinguish between bam's critical gametogenesis role being 
newly derived in D. melanogaster, D. simulans, Drosophila yakuba, and D. 
ananassae females or it being basal to the genus and subsequently lost in 
numerous lineages.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac137
PMCID: PMC9250105
PMID: 35714266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


527. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 16;39(6):msac132. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac132. Online 
ahead of print.

A near-deterministic mutational hotspot in Pseudomonas fluorescens is 
constructed by multiple interacting genomic features.

Shepherd MJ(1), Horton JS(1), Taylor TB(1).

Author information:
(1)Milner Centre for Evolution, Department of Biology & Biochemistry, University 
of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.

Mutation - whilst stochastic - is frequently biased toward certain loci. When 
combined with selection this results in highly repeatable and predictable 
evolutionary outcomes. Immotile variants of the bacterium Pseudomonas 
fluorescens (SBW25) possess a 'mutational hotspot' that facilitates repeated 
occurrences of an identical de novo single nucleotide polymorphism when 
re-evolving motility, where ≥95% independent lines fix the mutation ntrB A289C. 
Identifying hotspots of similar potency in other genes and genomic backgrounds 
would prove valuable for predictive evolutionary models, but to do so we must 
understand the genomic features that enable such a hotspot to form. Here we 
reveal that genomic location, local nucleotide sequence, gene strandedness and 
presence of mismatch repair proteins operate in combination to facilitate the 
formation of this mutational hotspot. Our study therefore provides a framework 
for utilising genomic features to predict and identify hotspot positions capable 
of enforcing near-deterministic evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac132
PMCID: PMC9234803
PMID: 35707979


528. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac135. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac135.

A Dual Barcoding Approach to Bacterial Strain Nomenclature: Genomic Taxonomy of 
Klebsiella pneumoniae Strains.

Hennart M(1)(2), Guglielmini J(3), Bridel S(1), Maiden MCJ(4), Jolley KA(4), 
Criscuolo A(3), Brisse S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Biodiversity and Epidemiology of 
Bacterial Pathogens, Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne Université, Collège Doctoral, Paris, France.
(3)Institut Pasteur, Université Paris Cité, Bioinformatics and Biostatistics 
Hub, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Sublineages (SLs) within microbial species can differ widely in their ecology 
and pathogenicity, and their precise definition is important in basic research 
and for industrial or public health applications. Widely accepted strategies to 
define SLs are currently missing, which confuses communication in population 
biology and epidemiological surveillance. Here, we propose a broadly applicable 
genomic classification and nomenclature approach for bacterial strains, using 
the prominent public health threat Klebsiella pneumoniae as a model. Based on a 
629-gene core genome multilocus sequence typing (cgMLST) scheme, we devised a 
dual barcoding system that combines multilevel single linkage (MLSL) clustering 
and life identification numbers (LINs). Phylogenetic and clustering analyses of 
>7,000 genome sequences captured population structure discontinuities, which 
were used to guide the definition of 10 infraspecific genetic dissimilarity 
thresholds. The widely used 7-gene multilocus sequence typing (MLST) 
nomenclature was mapped onto MLSL SLs (threshold: 190 allelic mismatches) and 
clonal group (threshold: 43) identifiers for backwards nomenclature 
compatibility. The taxonomy is publicly accessible through a community-curated 
platform (https://bigsdb.pasteur.fr/klebsiella), which also enables external 
users' genomic sequences identification. The proposed strain taxonomy combines 
two phylogenetically informative barcode systems that provide full stability 
(LIN codes) and nomenclatural continuity with previous nomenclature (MLSL). This 
species-specific dual barcoding strategy for the genomic taxonomy of microbial 
strains is broadly applicable and should contribute to unify global and 
cross-sector collaborative knowledge on the emergence and microevolution of 
bacterial pathogens.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac135
PMCID: PMC9254007
PMID: 35700230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


529. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac133. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac133.

Accurate Identification of Transcription Regulatory Sequences and Genes in 
Coronaviruses.

Zhang C(1), Sashittal P(2), Xiang M(2), Zhang Y(2), Kazi A(2), El-Kebir M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana, IL, USA.

Transcription regulatory sequences (TRSs), which occur upstream of structural 
and accessory genes as well as the 5' end of a coronavirus genome, play a 
critical role in discontinuous transcription in coronaviruses. We introduce two 
problems collectively aimed at identifying these regulatory sequences as well as 
their associated genes. First, we formulate the TRS Identification problem of 
identifying TRS sites in a coronavirus genome sequence with prescribed gene 
locations. We introduce CORSID-A, an algorithm that solves this problem to 
optimality in polynomial time. We demonstrate that CORSID-A outperforms existing 
motif-based methods in identifying TRS sites in coronaviruses. Second, we 
demonstrate for the first time how TRS sites can be leveraged to identify gene 
locations in the coronavirus genome. To that end, we formulate the TRS and Gene 
Identification problem of simultaneously identifying TRS sites and gene 
locations in unannotated coronavirus genomes. We introduce CORSID to solve this 
problem, which includes a web-based visualization tool to explore the space of 
near-optimal solutions. We show that CORSID outperforms state-of-the-art gene 
finding methods in coronavirus genomes. Furthermore, we demonstrate that CORSID 
enables de novo identification of TRS sites and genes in previously unannotated 
coronavirus genomes. CORSID is the first method to perform accurate and 
simultaneous identification of TRS sites and genes in coronavirus genomes 
without the use of any prior information.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac133
PMCID: PMC9214144
PMID: 35700225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


530. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 14;39(6):msac130. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac130. Online 
ahead of print.

Tree House Explorer: A Novel Genome Browser for Phylogenomics.

Harris AJ(1)(2), Foley NM(1), Williams TL(3), Murphy WJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Program in Genetics & Genomics, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana, IL, USA.

Tree House Explorer (THEx) is a genome browser that integrates phylogenomic data 
and genomic annotations into a single interactive platform for combined 
analysis. THEx allows users to visualize genome-wide variation in evolutionary 
histories and genetic divergence on a chromosome-by-chromosome basis, with 
continuous sliding window comparisons to gene annotations (GFF/GTF), 
recombination rates, and other user-specified, highly customizable feature 
annotations. THEx provides a new platform for interactive phylogenomic data 
visualization to analyze and interpret the diverse evolutionary histories woven 
throughout genomes. Hosted on Conda, THEx integrates seamlessly into new or 
pre-existing workflows.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac130
PMCID: PMC9246335
PMID: 35700217


531. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 14;39(6):msac129. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac129. Online 
ahead of print.

Duplication of NRAMP3 gene in poplars generated two homologous transporters with 
distinct functions.

Pottier M(1)(2), Le Thi VA(1)(3), Primard-Brisset C(1), Marion J(1), Bianchi 
M(1), Victor C(1), Déjardin A(4), Pilate G(4), Thomine S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Intégrative de la Cellule, CNRS, Avenue de la Terrasse, 
91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Current affiliation: Institute for Molecular Physiology, 
Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf 40225, Germany.
(3)Current affiliation: Graduate University of Science and Technology (GUST), 
Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology (VAST), 18 Hoang Quoc Viet, Cau Giay, 
Hanoi 10000, Vietnam.
(4)INRAE, ONF, BioForA, Orléans, France.

Transition metals are essential for a wealth of metabolic reactions, but their 
concentrations need to be tightly controlled across cells and cell compartments, 
as metal excess or imbalance has deleterious effects. Metal homeostasis is 
achieved by a combination of metal transport across membranes and metal binding 
to a variety of molecules. Gene duplication is a key process in evolution, as 
emergence of advantageous mutations on one of the copies can confer a new 
function. Here, we report that the poplar genome contains two paralogues 
encoding NRAMP3 metal transporters localized in tandem. All Populus species 
analyzed had two copies of NRAMP3, whereas only one could be identified in Salix 
species indicating that duplication occurred when the two genera separated. Both 
copies are under purifying selection and encode functional transporters, as 
shown by expression in the yeast heterologous expression system. However, 
genetic complementation revealed that only one of the paralogues has retained 
the original function in release of metals stored in the vacuole previously 
characterized in A. thaliana. Confocal imaging showed that the other copy has 
acquired a distinct localization to the Trans Golgi Network (TGN). Expression in 
poplar suggested that the copy of NRAMP3 localized on the TGN has a novel 
function in the control of cell-to-cell transport of manganese. This work 
provides a clear case of neo-functionalization through change in the subcellular 
localization of a metal transporter as well as evidence for the involvement of 
the secretory pathway in cell-to-cell transport of manganese.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac129
PMCID: PMC9234761
PMID: 35700212


532. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 11;39(6):msac131. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac131. Online 
ahead of print.

Recombination landscape divergence between populations is marked by larger 
low-recombining regions in domesticated rye.

Schreiber M(1)(2), Gao Y(3), Koch N(3), Fuchs J(2), Heckmann S(2), Himmelbach 
A(2), Börner A(2), Özkan H(4), Maurer A(3), Stein N(2), Mascher M(2)(5), 
Dreissig S(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Marburg, Department of Biology, Marburg, Germany.
(2)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK), Seeland, 
OT Gatersleben, Germany.
(3)Institute of Agricultural and Nutritional Sciences, Martin-Luther-University 
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(4)University of Cukurova, Faculty of Agriculture, Department of Field Crops, 
01330 Adana, Turkey.
(5)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) 
Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

The genomic landscape of recombination plays an essential role in evolution. 
Patterns of recombination are highly variable along chromosomes, between sexes, 
individuals, populations, and species. In many eukaryotes, recombination rates 
are elevated in sub-telomeric regions and drastically reduced near centromeres, 
resulting in large low-recombining (LR) regions. The processes of recombination 
are influenced by genetic factors, such as different alleles of genes involved 
in meiosis and chromatin structure, as well as external environmental stimuli 
like temperature and overall stress. In this work, we focused on the genomic 
landscapes of recombination in a collection of 916 rye (Secale cereale) 
individuals. By analysing population structure among individuals of different 
domestication status and geographic origin, we detected high levels of 
admixture, reflecting the reproductive biology of a self-incompatible, 
wind-pollinating grass species. We then analysed patterns of recombination in 
overlapping subpopulations, which revealed substantial variation in the physical 
size of LR regions, with a tendency for larger LR regions in domesticated 
subpopulations. Genome-wide association scans (GWAS) for LR region size revealed 
a major quantitative-trait-locus (QTL) at which, among 18 annotated genes, an 
ortholog of histone H4 acetyltransferase ESA1 was located. Rye individuals 
belonging to domesticated subpopulations showed increased synaptonemal complex 
length, but no difference in crossover frequency, indicating that only the 
recombination landscape is different. Furthermore, the genomic region harbouring 
rye ScESA1 showed moderate patterns of selection in domesticated subpopulations, 
suggesting that larger LR regions were indirectly selected for during 
domestication to achieve more homogeneous populations for agricultural use.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac131
PMCID: PMC9218680
PMID: 35687854


533. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac127. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac127.

Spatiotemporal Regulation of a Single Adaptively Evolving Trans-Regulatory 
Element Contributes to Spermatogenetic Expression Divergence in Drosophila.

Huang Y(1), Shang R(1), Lu GA(1), Zeng W(1), Huang C(1), Zou C(1), Tang T(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol and Guangdong Key Laboratory of Plant 
Resources, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, 510275 Guangzhou, 
Guangdong Province, China.

Due to extensive pleiotropy, trans-acting elements are often thought to be 
evolutionarily constrained. While the impact of trans-acting elements on gene 
expression evolution has been extensively studied, relatively little is 
understood about the contribution of a single trans regulator to interspecific 
expression and phenotypic divergence. Here, we disentangle the effects of 
genomic context and miR-983, an adaptively evolving young microRNA, on 
expression divergence between Drosophila melanogaster and D. simulans. We show 
miR-983 effects promote interspecific expression divergence in testis despite 
its antagonism with the often-predominant context effects. Single-cyst RNA-seq 
reveals that distinct sets of genes gain and lose miR-983 influence under 
disruptive or diversifying selection at different stages of spermatogenesis, 
potentially helping minimize antagonistic pleiotropy. At the round spermatid 
stage, the effects of miR-983 are weak and distributed, coincident with the 
transcriptome undergoing drastic expression changes. Knocking out miR-983 causes 
reduced sperm length with increased within-individual variation in D. 
melanogaster but not in D. simulans, and the D. melanogaster knockout also 
exhibits compromised sperm defense ability. Our results provide empirical 
evidence for the resolution of antagonistic pleiotropy and also have broad 
implications for the function and evolution of new trans regulators.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac127
PMCID: PMC9254010
PMID: 35687719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


534. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 9;39(6):msac126. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac126. Online 
ahead of print.

A transcriptomic atlas underlying developmental plasticity of seasonal forms of 
Bicyclus anynana butterflies.

Tian S(1), Monteiro A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.

Organisms residing in regions with alternating seasons often develop different 
phenotypes, or forms, in each season. These forms are often adaptations to each 
season and result from an altered developmental response to specific 
environmental cues such as temperature. While multiple studies have examined 
form-specific gene expression profiles in a diversity of species, little is 
known about how environments and developmental transitions, cued by hormone 
pulses, alter post-transcriptional patterns. In this study, we examine how gene 
expression, alternative splicing, and miRNA-mediated gene silencing in Bicyclus 
anynana butterfly hindwing tissue, varies across two rearing temperatures at 
four developmental timepoints. These timepoints flank two temperature-sensitive 
periods that coincide with two pulses of the insect hormone 20E. Our results 
suggest that developmental transitions, coincident with 20E pulses, elicit a 
greater impact on all these transcriptomic patterns than rearing temperatures 
per se. More similar transcriptomic patterns are observed pre-20E pulses than 
those observed post-20E pulses. We also found functionally distinct sets of 
differentially expressed and differentially spliced genes in the seasonal forms. 
Furthermore, around 10% of differentially expressed genes are predicted to be 
direct targets of, and regulated by, differentially expressed miRNAs between the 
seasonal forms. Many differentially expressed genes, miRNAs, or differentially 
spliced genes potentially regulate eyespot size plasticity, and we validated the 
differential splicing pattern of one such gene, daughterless. We present a 
comprehensive and interactive transcriptomic atlas of the hindwing tissue of 
both seasonal forms of B. anynana throughout development, a model organism of 
seasonal plasticity.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac126
PMCID: PMC9218548
PMID: 35679434


535. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 9;39(6):msac124. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac124. Online 
ahead of print.

Trade-offs predicted by metabolic network structure give rise to evolutionary 
specialization and phenotypic diversification.

Ekkers DM(1)(2), Tusso S(3)(4), Moreno-Gamez S(1), Rillo MC(5), Kuipers OP(2), 
van Doorn GS(1).

Author information:
(1)Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences (GELIFES), University of 
Groningen, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 AG, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Molecular Genetics Group, Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology 
Institute, University of Groningen, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 AG, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, LMU Munich, 
Grosshaderner Str. 2, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(4)Science for Life Laboratories and Department of Evolutionary Biology, 
Norbyvägen 18D, 75236 Uppsala University, 75236 Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the Marine Environment, Carl von 
Ossietzky University Oldenburg, Schleusenstr. 1, 26382, Wilhelmshaven, Germany.

Mitigating trade-offs between different resource-utilization functions is key to 
an organism's ecological and evolutionary success. These trade-offs often 
reflect metabolic constraints with a complex molecular underpinning; therefore, 
their consequences for evolutionary processes have remained elusive. Here, we 
investigate how metabolic architecture induces resource utilization constraints 
and how these constraints, in turn, elicit evolutionary specialization and 
diversification. Guided by the metabolic network structure of the bacterium 
Lactococcus cremoris, we selected two carbon sources (fructose and galactose) 
with predicted co-utilization constraints. By evolving L. cremoris on either 
fructose, galactose or a mix of both sugars, we imposed selection favoring 
divergent metabolic specializations or co-utilization of both resources, 
respectively. Phenotypic characterization revealed the evolution of either 
fructose or galactose specialists in the single-sugar treatments. In the mixed 
sugar regime, we observed adaptive diversification: both specialists coexisted, 
and no generalist evolved. Divergence from the ancestral phenotype occurred at 
key pathway junctions in the central carbon metabolism. Fructose specialists 
evolved mutations in the fbp and pfk genes that appear to balance anabolic and 
catabolic carbon fluxes. Galactose specialists evolved increased expression of 
pgmA (the primary metabolic bottleneck of galactose metabolism) and silencing of 
ptnABCD (the main glucose transporter) and ldh (regulator/enzyme of downstream 
carbon metabolism). Overall, our study shows how metabolic network architecture 
and historical contingency serve to predict targets of selection and inform the 
functional interpretation of evolved mutations. The elucidation of the 
relationship between molecular constraints and phenotypic trade-offs contributes 
to an integrative understanding of evolutionary specialization and 
diversification.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac124
PMCID: PMC9206417
PMID: 35679426


536. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 7;39(6):msac123. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac123. Online 
ahead of print.

Recurrent Plant-Specific Duplications of KNL2 and Its Conserved Function as a 
Kinetochore Assembly Factor.

Zuo S(1)(2), Yadala R(3), Yang F(4)(5), Talbert P(6), Fuchs J(3), Schubert V(3), 
Ahmadli U(3), Rutten T(3), Pecinka A(4)(5), Lysak MA(1)(2), Lermontova I(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Central European Institute of Technology (CEITEC), Masaryk University, 
Kamenice 5, CZ-625 00 Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Faculty of Science, Masaryk 
University, Kamenice 5, CZ-625 00 Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK) 
Gatersleben, Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466 Seeland, Germany.
(4)Institute of Experimental Botany, Czech Acad Sci, Centre of the Region Haná 
for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Šlechtitelů 31, 779 00 Olomouc, 
Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Palacký 
University, Šlechtitelů 27, 779 00 Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA.

KINETOCHORE NULL2 (KNL2) plays key role in the recognition of centromeres and 
new CENH3 deposition. To gain insight into the origin and diversification of the 
KNL2 gene, we reconstructed its evolutionary history in the plant kingdom. Our 
results indicate that the KNL2 gene in plants underwent three independent 
ancient duplications in ferns, grasses and eudicots. Additionally, we 
demonstrated that previously unclassified KNL2 genes could be divided into two 
clades αKNL2 and βKNL2 in eudicots and γKNL2 and δKNL2 in grasses, respectively. 
KNL2s of all clades encode the conserved SANTA domain, but only the αKNL2 and 
γKNL2 groups additionally encode the CENPC-k motif. In the more numerous eudicot 
sequences, signatures of positive selection were found in both αKNL2 and βKNL2 
clades, suggesting recent or ongoing adaptation. The confirmed centromeric 
localization of βKNL2 and mutant analysis suggests that it participates in 
loading of new CENH3, similarly to αKNL2. A high rate of seed abortion was found 
in heterozygous βKNL2 plants and the germinated homozygous mutants did not 
develop beyond the seedling stage. Taken together, our study provides a new 
understanding of the evolutionary diversification of the plant kinetochore 
assembly gene KNL2, and suggests that the plant-specific duplicated KNL2 genes 
are involved in centromere and/or kinetochore assembly for preserving genome 
stability.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac123
PMCID: PMC9210943
PMID: 35671323


537. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jul 2;39(7):msac122. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac122.

Interactions Between Natural Selection and Recombination Shape the Genomic 
Landscape of Introgression.

Duranton M(1), Pool JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

Hybridization between lineages that have not reached complete reproductive 
isolation appears more and more like a common phenomenon. Indeed, speciation 
genomic studies have now extensively shown that many species' genomes have 
hybrid ancestry. However, genomic patterns of introgression are often 
heterogeneous across the genome. In many organisms, a positive correlation 
between introgression levels and recombination rate has been observed. It is 
usually explained by the purging of deleterious introgressed material due to 
incompatibilities. However, the opposite relationship was observed in a North 
American population of Drosophila melanogaster with admixed European and African 
ancestry. In order to explore how directional and epistatic selection can impact 
the relationship between introgression and recombination, we performed forward 
simulations of whole D. melanogaster genomes reflecting the North American 
population's history. Our results revealed that the simplest models of positive 
selection often yield negative correlations between introgression and 
recombination such as the one observed in D. melanogaster. We also confirmed 
that incompatibilities tend to produce positive introgression-recombination 
correlations. And yet, we identify parameter space under each model where the 
predicted correlation is reversed. These findings deepen our understanding of 
the evolutionary forces that may shape patterns of ancestry across genomes, and 
they strengthen the foundation for future studies aimed at estimating 
genome-wide parameters of selection in admixed populations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac122
PMCID: PMC9317171
PMID: 35666817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


538. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac107. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac107.

Functional Diversity and Evolution of Bitter Taste Receptors in Egg-Laying 
Mammals.

Itoigawa A(1)(2), Hayakawa T(3)(4), Zhou Y(5), Manning AD(6), Zhang G(7), 
Grutzner F(8), Imai H(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Primate Research Institute, 
Kyoto University, Inuyama, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, School of Agriculture, Meiji 
University, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Environmental Earth Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 
Hokkaido, Japan.
(4)Japan Monkey Centre, Inuyama, Aichi, Japan.
(5)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(6)Fenner School of Environment and Society, The Australian National University, 
Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(7)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Kobenhavn, Denmark.
(8)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(9)Molecular Biology Section, Center for the Evolutionary Origins of Human 
Behavior, Kyoto University, Inuyama, Aichi, Japan.

Egg-laying mammals (monotremes) are a sister clade of therians (placental 
mammals and marsupials) and a key clade to understand mammalian evolution. They 
are classified into platypus and echidna, which exhibit distinct ecological 
features such as habitats and diet. Chemosensory genes, which encode sensory 
receptors for taste and smell, are believed to adapt to the individual habitats 
and diet of each mammal. In this study, we focused on the molecular evolution of 
bitter taste receptors (TAS2Rs) in monotremes. The sense of bitter taste is 
important to detect potentially harmful substances. We comprehensively surveyed 
agonists of all TAS2Rs in platypus (Ornithorhynchus anatinus) and short-beaked 
echidna (Tachyglossus aculeatus) and compared their functions with orthologous 
TAS2Rs of marsupial and placental mammals (i.e., therians). As results, the 
agonist screening revealed that the deorphanized monotreme receptors were 
functionally diversified. Platypus TAS2Rs had broader receptive ranges of 
agonists than those of echidna TAS2Rs. While platypus consumes a variety of 
aquatic invertebrates, echidna mainly consumes subterranean social insects (ants 
and termites) as well as other invertebrates. This result indicates that 
receptive ranges of TAS2Rs could be associated with feeding habits in 
monotremes. Furthermore, some orthologous receptors in monotremes and therians 
responded to β-glucosides, which are feeding deterrents in plants and insects. 
These results suggest that the ability to detect β-glucosides and other 
substances might be shared and ancestral among mammals.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac107
PMCID: PMC9161717
PMID: 35652727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


539. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac119. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac119.

distAngsd: Fast and Accurate Inference of Genetic Distances for Next-Generation 
Sequencing Data.

Zhao L(1), Nielsen R(1)(2)(3), Korneliussen TS(1).

Author information:
(1)Section for Geogenetics, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Øster 
Voldgade 5-7, 1350 København K, Denmark.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, 3040 Valley Life 
Sciences Building 3140, Berkeley, CA 94720-3140, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of California, 3040 Valley Life Sciences 
Building 3140, Berkeley, CA 94720-3140, USA.

Commonly used methods for inferring phylogenies were designed before the 
emergence of high-throughput sequencing and can generally not accommodate the 
challenges associated with noisy, diploid sequencing data. In many applications, 
diploid genomes are still treated as haploid through the use of ambiguity 
characters; while the uncertainty in genotype calling-arising as a consequence 
of the sequencing technology-is ignored. In order to address this problem, we 
describe two new probabilistic approaches for estimating genetic distances: 
distAngsd-geno and distAngsd-nuc, both implemented in a software suite named 
distAngsd. These methods are specifically designed for next-generation 
sequencing data, utilize the full information from the data, and take 
uncertainty in genotype calling into account. Through extensive simulations, we 
show that these new methods are markedly more accurate and have more stable 
statistical behaviors than other currently available methods for estimating 
genetic distances-even for very low depth data with high error rates.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac119
PMCID: PMC9234764
PMID: 35647675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


540. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac112. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac112.

Using all Gene Families Vastly Expands Data Available for Phylogenomic 
Inference.

Smith ML(1)(2), Vanderpool D(1)(2), Hahn MW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.

Traditionally, single-copy orthologs have been the gold standard in 
phylogenomics. Most phylogenomic studies identify putative single-copy orthologs 
using clustering approaches and retain families with a single sequence per 
species. This limits the amount of data available by excluding larger families. 
Recent advances have suggested several ways to include data from larger 
families. For instance, tree-based decomposition methods facilitate the 
extraction of orthologs from large families. Additionally, several methods for 
species tree inference are robust to the inclusion of paralogs and could use all 
of the data from larger families. Here, we explore the effects of using all 
families for phylogenetic inference by examining relationships among 26 primate 
species in detail and by analyzing five additional data sets. We compare 
single-copy families, orthologs extracted using tree-based decomposition 
approaches, and all families with all data. We explore several species tree 
inference methods, finding that identical trees are returned across nearly all 
subsets of the data and methods for primates. The relationships among 
Platyrrhini remain contentious; however, the species tree inference method 
matters more than the subset of data used. Using data from larger gene families 
drastically increases the number of genes available and leads to consistent 
estimates of branch lengths, nodal certainty and concordance, and inferences of 
introgression in primates. For the other data sets, topological inferences are 
consistent whether single-copy families or orthologs extracted using 
decomposition approaches are analyzed. Using larger gene families is a promising 
approach to include more data in phylogenomics without sacrificing accuracy, at 
least when high-quality genomes are available.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac112
PMCID: PMC9178227
PMID: 35642314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


541. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac110. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac110.

The Visayan Warty Pig (Sus cebifrons) Genome Provides Insight Into Chromosome 
Evolution and Sensory Adaptation in Pigs.

Liu L(1)(2), Megens HJ(1), Crooijmans RPMA(1), Bosse M(1), Huang Q(1)(3), van 
Sonsbeek L(4), Groenen MAM(1), Madsen O(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich, Munich, Germany.
(3)Center for Animal Genomics, Agricultural Genome Institute at Shenzhen, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen 518124, China.
(4)Rotterdam Zoo (diergaarde blijdorp), PO Box 532, 3000AM Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

It is largely unknown how mammalian genomes evolve under rapid speciation and 
environmental adaptation. An excellent model for understanding fast evolution is 
provided by the genus Sus, which diverged relatively recently and lacks 
postzygotic isolation. Here, we present a high-quality reference genome of the 
Visayan warty pig, which is specialized to a tropical island environment. 
Comparing the genome sequences and chromatin contact maps of the Visayan warty 
pig (Sus cebifrons) and domestic pig (Sus scrofa), we characterized the dynamics 
of chromosomal structure evolution during Sus speciation, revealing the similar 
chromosome conformation as the potential biological mechanism of frequent 
postdivergence hybridization among Suidae. We further investigated the different 
signatures of adaptive selection and domestication in Visayan warty pig and 
domestic pig with specific emphasize on the evolution of olfactory and gustatory 
genes, elucidating higher olfactory diversity in Visayan warty pig and positive 
and relaxed evolution of bitter and fat taste receptors, respectively, in 
domestic pig. Our comprehensive evolutionary and comparative genome analyses 
provide insight into the dynamics of genomes and how these change over relative 
short evolutionary times, as well as how these genomic differences encode for 
differences in the phenotypes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac110
PMCID: PMC9178973
PMID: 35642310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


542. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac120. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac120.

How Placenta Promotes the Successful Reproduction in High-Altitude Populations: 
A Transcriptome Comparison between Adaptation and Acclimatization.

Wu D(1), Liu Y(1), Chen W(1)(2), Shao J(1), Zhuoma P(3), Zhao D(4), Yu Y(5), Liu 
T(1), Yu R(6), Gan Y(4), Yuzheng B(3), Huang Y(3), Zhang H(1), Bi X(1), Tao 
C(1), Lai S(1), Luo Q(7), Zhang D(1)(2), Wang H(6), Zhaxi P(7), Zhang J(3), Qiao 
J(5), Zeng C(1).

Author information:
(1)The Key Laboratory of Precision and Genomic Medicine, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences; Beijing Institute of Genomics (China National Center for 
Bioinformation), University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Advanced Innovation Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Key Laboratory 
for Biomechanics and Mechanobiology of Ministry of Education, School of 
Engineering Medicine, Beihang University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Second People's Hospital of 
Tibet Autonomous Region, Lhasa, Tibet, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Qinghai Red Cross Hospital, Xining, 
Qinghai, China.
(5)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Reproductive Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(7)The Third People's Hospital of Tibet Autonomous Region, Lhasa, Tibet, China.

As the best adapted high altitude population, Tibetans feature a relatively high 
offspring survival rate. Genome-wide studies have identified hundreds of 
candidate SNPs related to high altitude adaptation of Tibetans, although most of 
them have unknown functional relevance. To explore the mechanisms behind 
successful reproduction at high altitudes, we compared the placental 
transcriptomes of Tibetans, sea level Hans (SLHan), and Han immigrants (ImHan). 
Among the three populations, placentas from ImHan showed a hyperactive gene 
expression pattern. Their increased activation demonstrates a hypoxic stress 
response similar to sea level individuals experiencing hypoxic conditions. 
Unlike ImHan, Tibetan placentas were characterized by the significant 
up-regulation of placenta-specific genes, and the activation of autophagy and 
the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Certain conserved hypoxia response 
functions, including the antioxidant system and angiogenesis, were activated in 
both ImHan and Tibetans, but mediated by different genes. The coherence of 
specific transcriptome features linked to possible genetic contribution was 
observed in Tibetans. Furthermore, we identified a novel Tibetan-specific EPAS1 
isoform with a partial deletion at exon six, which may be involved in the 
adaption to hypoxia through the EPAS1-centred gene network in the placenta. 
Overall, our results show that the placenta grants successful pregnancies in 
Tibetans by strengthening the natural functions of the placenta itself. On the 
other hand, the placenta of ImHan was in an inhabiting time-dependent 
acclimatization process representing a common hypoxic stress response pattern.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac120
PMCID: PMC9206416
PMID: 35642306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


543. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac121. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac121.

Genetic Variation in Reproductive Investment Across an Ephemerality Gradient in 
Daphnia pulex.

Barnard-Kubow KB(1)(2), Becker D(1)(3)(4), Murray CS(1), Porter R(1), Gutierrez 
G(1), Erickson P(1), Nunez JCB(1), Voss E(1)(5), Suryamohan K(6), Ratan A(7)(8), 
Beckerman A(3), Bergland AO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA, USA.
(3)School of Biosciences, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Integrative Biology, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(6)MedGenome Inc., Foster City, CA, USA.
(7)Center for Public Health Genomics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 
VA, USA.
(8)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Species across the tree of life can switch between asexual and sexual 
reproduction. In facultatively sexual species, the ability to switch between 
reproductive modes is often environmentally dependent and subject to local 
adaptation. However, the ecological and evolutionary factors that influence the 
maintenance and turnover of polymorphism associated with facultative sex remain 
unclear. We studied the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of reproductive 
investment in the facultatively sexual model species, Daphnia pulex. We found 
that patterns of clonal diversity, but not genetic diversity varied among ponds 
consistent with the predicted relationship between ephemerality and clonal 
structure. Reconstruction of a multi-year pedigree demonstrated the coexistence 
of clones that differ in their investment into male production. Mapping of 
quantitative variation in male production using lab-generated and 
field-collected individuals identified multiple putative quantitative trait loci 
(QTL) underlying this trait, and we identified a plausible candidate gene. The 
evolutionary history of these QTL suggests that they are relatively young, and 
male limitation in this system is a rapidly evolving trait. Our work highlights 
the dynamic nature of the genetic structure and composition of facultative sex 
across space and time and suggests that quantitative genetic variation in 
reproductive strategy can undergo rapid evolutionary turnover.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac121
PMCID: PMC9198359
PMID: 35642301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


544. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac072. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac072.

Correction to: Evolution of Brain-Expressed Biogenic Amine Receptors into 
Olfactory Trace Amine-Associated Receptors.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac072
PMCID: PMC9155947
PMID: 35640652


545. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac117. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac117.

Genomic Signatures of Divergent Ecological Strategies in a Recent Radiation of 
Neotropical Wild Cats.

Ramirez JL(1), Lescroart J(2)(3), Figueiró HV(2)(4), Torres-Florez JP(5), 
Villela PMS(6), Coutinho LL(7), Freitas PD(8), Johnson WE(9), Antunes A(10)(11), 
Galetti PM(8), Eizirik E(2)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular y Genética, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, 
Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Peru.
(2)School of Health and Life Sciences, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio 
Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Center for Species Survival, Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, 
National Zoological Park, Front Royal, Virginia, USA.
(5)Instituto Chico Mendes de Conservação da Biodiversidade/Centro Nacional de 
Pesquisa e Conservação de Mamíferos Aquáticos (ICMBio/CMA), Santos, Brazil.
(6)EcoMol Consultoria e Projetos, Piracicaba-SP, Brazil.
(7)Centro de Genômica Funcional, Luiz de Queiroz College of Agriculture, 
University of São Paulo, Piracicaba, Brazil.
(8)Departamento de Genética e Evolução, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São 
Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil.
(9)Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, National Zoological Park, 
Washington, DC, USA.
(10)CIIMAR/CIMAR, Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, 
University of Porto, Terminal de Cruzeiros do Porto de Leixões, Porto, Portugal.
(11)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(12)Instituto Pró-Carnívoros, Atibaia, São Carlos, Brazil.
(13)INCT-EECBio, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil.

Ecological differentiation among diverging species is an important component of 
the evolutionary process and can be investigated in rapid and recent radiations. 
Here, we use whole genome sequences of five species from the genus Leopardus, a 
recently diversified Neotropical lineage with species bearing distinctive 
morphological, ecological, and behavioral features, to investigate genome-wide 
diversity, comparative demographic history and signatures of positive selection. 
Our results show that divergent ecological strategies are reflected in genomic 
features, for example a generalist species shows historically larger effective 
population size and higher heterozygosity than habitat specialists. The 
demographic history of these cats seems to have been jointly driven by climate 
fluctuations and habitat specialization, with different ecological adaptations 
leading to distinct trajectories. Finally, a gene involved in vertebrate retinal 
neurogenesis (POU4F2) was found to be under positive selection in the margay, a 
cat with notoriously large eyes that are likely associated with its nocturnal 
and arboreal specializations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac117
PMCID: PMC9189605
PMID: 35639983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


546. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac118. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac118.

A Population-Genetic Lens into the Process of Gene Loss Following Whole-Genome 
Duplication.

Johri P(1), Gout JF(2), Doak TG(3)(4), Lynch M(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi 
State, MS 39762, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
(4)National Center for Genome Analysis Support, Indiana University, Bloomington, 
IN 47405, USA.
(5)Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

Whole-genome duplications (WGDs) have occurred in many eukaryotic lineages. 
However, the underlying evolutionary forces and molecular mechanisms responsible 
for the long-term retention of gene duplicates created by WGDs are not well 
understood. We employ a population-genomic approach to understand the selective 
forces acting on paralogs and investigate ongoing duplicate-gene loss in 
multiple species of Paramecium that share an ancient WGD. We show that mutations 
that abolish protein function are more likely to be segregating in retained WGD 
paralogs than in single-copy genes, most likely because of ongoing 
nonfunctionalization post-WGD. This relaxation of purifying selection occurs in 
only one WGD paralog, accompanied by the gradual fixation of nonsynonymous 
mutations and reduction in levels of expression, and occurs over a long period 
of evolutionary time, "marking" one locus for future loss. Concordantly, the 
fitness effects of new nonsynonymous mutations and frameshift-causing indels are 
significantly more deleterious in the highly expressed copy compared with their 
paralogs with lower expression. Our results provide a novel mechanistic model of 
gene duplicate loss following WGDs, wherein selection acts on the sum of 
functional activity of both duplicate genes, allowing the two to wander in 
expression and functional space, until one duplicate locus eventually 
degenerates enough in functional efficiency or expression that its contribution 
to total activity is too insignificant to be retained by purifying selection. 
Retention of duplicates by such mechanisms predicts long times to duplicate-gene 
loss, which should not be falsely attributed to retention due to gain/change in 
function.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac118
PMCID: PMC9206413
PMID: 35639978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


547. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac115. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac115.

Evolution of Plasmid Mobility: Origin and Fate of Conjugative and Nonconjugative 
Plasmids.

Coluzzi C(1), Garcillán-Barcia MP(2), de la Cruz F(2), Rocha EPC(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur, Université de Paris Cité, CNRS, UMR3525, Microbial 
Evolutionary Genomics, Paris 75015, France.
(2)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria (IBBTEC), Universidad 
de Cantabria-CSIC, C/Albert Einstein 22, 39011 Santander, Spain.

Conjugation drives the horizontal transfer of adaptive traits across 
prokaryotes. One-fourth of the plasmids encode the functions necessary to 
conjugate autonomously, the others being eventually mobilizable by conjugation. 
To understand the evolution of plasmid mobility, we studied plasmid size, gene 
repertoires, and conjugation-related genes. Plasmid gene repertoires were found 
to vary rapidly in relation to the evolutionary rate of relaxases, for example, 
most pairs of plasmids with 95% identical relaxases have fewer than 50% of 
homologs. Among 249 recent transitions of mobility type, we observed a clear 
excess of plasmids losing the capacity to conjugate. These transitions are 
associated with even greater changes in gene repertoires, possibly mediated by 
transposable elements, including pseudogenization of the conjugation locus, 
exchange of replicases reducing the problem of incompatibility, and extensive 
loss of other genes. At the microevolutionary scale of plasmid taxonomy, 
transitions of mobility type sometimes result in the creation of novel taxonomic 
units. Interestingly, most transitions from conjugative to mobilizable plasmids 
seem to be lost in the long term. This suggests a source-sink dynamic, where 
conjugative plasmids generate nonconjugative plasmids that tend to be poorly 
adapted and are frequently lost. Still, in some cases, these relaxases seem to 
have evolved to become efficient at plasmid mobilization in trans, possibly by 
hijacking multiple conjugative systems. This resulted in specialized relaxases 
of mobilizable plasmids. In conclusion, the evolution of plasmid mobility is 
frequent, shapes the patterns of gene flow in bacteria, the dynamics of gene 
repertoires, and the ecology of plasmids.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac115
PMCID: PMC9185392
PMID: 35639760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


548. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac114. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac114.

PHACT: Phylogeny-Aware Computing of Tolerance for Missense Mutations.

Kuru N(1), Dereli O(1), Akkoyun E(1), Bircan A(1), Tastan O(1), Adebali O(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul 
34956, Turkey.

Evolutionary conservation is a fundamental resource for predicting the 
substitutability of amino acids and the loss of function in proteins. The use of 
multiple sequence alignment alone-without considering the evolutionary 
relationships among sequences-results in the redundant counting of 
evolutionarily related alteration events, as if they were independent. Here, we 
propose a new method, PHACT, that predicts the pathogenicity of missense 
mutations directly from the phylogenetic tree of proteins. PHACT travels through 
the nodes of the phylogenetic tree and evaluates the deleteriousness of a 
substitution based on the probability differences of ancestral amino acids 
between neighboring nodes in the tree. Moreover, PHACT assigns weights to each 
node in the tree based on their distance to the query organism. For each 
potential amino acid substitution, the algorithm generates a score that is used 
to calculate the effect of substitution on protein function. To analyze the 
predictive performance of PHACT, we performed various experiments over the 
subsets of two datasets that include 3,023 proteins and 61,662 variants in 
total. The experiments demonstrated that our method outperformed the widely used 
pathogenicity prediction tools (i.e., SIFT and PolyPhen-2) and achieved a better 
predictive performance than other conventional statistical approaches presented 
in dbNSFP. The PHACT source code is available at 
https://github.com/CompGenomeLab/PHACT.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac114
PMCID: PMC9178230
PMID: 35639618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


549. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac116. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac116.

Ancestral Sequence Reconstruction of a Cytochrome P450 Family Involved in 
Chemical Defense Reveals the Functional Evolution of a Promiscuous, 
Xenobiotic-Metabolizing Enzyme in Vertebrates.

Harris KL(1), Thomson RES(1), Gumulya Y(1), Foley G(1), Carrera-Pacheco SE(2), 
Syed P(1), Janosik T(3), Sandinge AS(4), Andersson S(5), Jurva U(4), Bodén M(1), 
Gillam EMJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, 
St. Lucia, Brisbane 4072, QLD, Australia.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud Eugenio 
Espejo, Universidad UTE, Quito 170147, Ecuador.
(3)RISE Research Institutes of Sweden, Division Bioeconomy and Health, Chemical 
Process and Pharmaceutical Development, Södertälje, Sweden.
(4)DMPK, Early Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolism, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, 
Astrazeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Discovery Sciences, BioPharmaceuticals R&D, Astrazeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden.

The cytochrome P450 family 1 enzymes (CYP1s) are a diverse family of hemoprotein 
monooxygenases, which metabolize many xenobiotics including numerous 
environmental carcinogens. However, their historical function and evolution 
remain largely unstudied. Here we investigate CYP1 evolution via the 
reconstruction and characterization of the vertebrate CYP1 ancestors. Younger 
ancestors and extant forms generally demonstrated higher activity toward typical 
CYP1 xenobiotic and steroid substrates than older ancestors, suggesting 
significant diversification away from the original CYP1 function. Caffeine 
metabolism appears to be a recently evolved trait of the CYP1A subfamily, 
observed in the mammalian CYP1A lineage, and may parallel the recent evolution 
of caffeine synthesis in multiple separate plant species. Likewise, the aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor agonist, 6-formylindolo[3,2-b]carbazole (FICZ) was 
metabolized to a greater extent by certain younger ancestors and extant forms, 
suggesting that activity toward FICZ increased in specific CYP1 evolutionary 
branches, a process that may have occurred in parallel to the exploitation of 
land where UV-exposure was higher than in aquatic environments. As observed with 
previous reconstructions of P450 enzymes, thermostability correlated with 
evolutionary age; the oldest ancestor was up to 35 °C more thermostable than the 
extant forms, with a 10T50 (temperature at which 50% of the hemoprotein remains 
intact after 10 min) of 71 °C. This robustness may have facilitated evolutionary 
diversification of the CYP1s by buffering the destabilizing effects of mutations 
that conferred novel functions, a phenomenon which may also be useful in 
exploiting the catalytic versatility of these ancestral enzymes for commercial 
application as biocatalysts.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac116
PMCID: PMC9185370
PMID: 35639613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


550. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac113. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac113.

The Mitogenome Relationships and Phylogeography of Barn Swallows (Hirundo 
rustica).

Lombardo G(1), Rambaldi Migliore N(1), Colombo G(1), Capodiferro MR(1), Formenti 
G(2), Caprioli M(3), Moroni E(1), Caporali L(4), Lancioni H(5), Secomandi S(6), 
Gallo GR(6), Costanzo A(3), Romano A(3), Garofalo M(7), Cereda C(7), Carelli 
V(4)(8), Gillespie L(9), Liu Y(10), Kiat Y(11), Marzal A(12), López-Calderón 
C(13), Balbontín J(14), Mousseau TA(15), Matyjasiak P(16), Møller AP(17), Semino 
O(1), Ambrosini R(3), Bonisoli-Alquati A(18), Rubolini D(3), Ferretti L(1), 
Achilli A(1), Gianfranceschi L(6), Olivieri A(1), Torroni A(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie "Lazzaro Spallanzani", Università di 
Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(2)Vertebrate Genome Laboratory, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze e Politiche Ambientali, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(4)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Programma di 
Neurogenetica, 40139 Bologna, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Chimica, Biologia e Biotecnologie, Università di Perugia, 
06123 Perugia, Italy.
(6)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20133 Milan, 
Italy.
(7)Genomic and Post-Genomic Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
(8)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Neuromotorie, Università di Bologna, 
40139 Bologna, Italy.
(9)Department of Academic Education, Central Community College, Columbus, NE 
68601, USA.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Ecology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510275, China.
(11)Israeli Bird Ringing Center (IBRC), Israel Ornithological Center, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(12)Department of Zoology, University of Extremadura, 06071 Badajoz, Spain.
(13)Department of Wetland Ecology, Estación Biológica de Doñana CSIC, 41092 
Seville, Spain.
(14)Department of Zoology, University of Seville, 41012 Seville, Spain.
(15)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, 
SC 29208, USA.
(16)Institute of Biological Sciences, Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński University in 
Warsaw, 01-938 Warsaw, Poland.
(17)Ecologie Systématique Evolution, Université Paris-Sud, CNRS, AgroParisTech, 
Université Paris-Saclay, 91405, Orsay Cedex, France.
(18)Department of Biological Sciences, California State Polytechnic University - 
Pomona, Pomona, CA 91767, USA.

The barn swallow (Hirundo rustica) poses a number of fascinating scientific 
questions, including the taxonomic status of postulated subspecies. Here, we 
obtained and assessed the sequence variation of 411 complete mitogenomes, mainly 
from the European H. r. rustica, but other subspecies as well. In almost every 
case, we observed subspecies-specific haplogroups, which we employed together 
with estimated radiation times to postulate a model for the geographical and 
temporal worldwide spread of the species. The female barn swallow carrying the 
Hirundo rustica ancestral mitogenome left Africa (or its vicinity) around 280 
thousand years ago (kya), and her descendants expanded first into Eurasia and 
then, at least 51 kya, into the Americas, from where a relatively recent 
(<20 kya) back migration to Asia took place. The exception to the haplogroup 
subspecies specificity is represented by the sedentary Levantine H. r. 
transitiva that extensively shares haplogroup A with the migratory European H. 
r. rustica and, to a lesser extent, haplogroup B with the Egyptian H. r. 
savignii. Our data indicate that rustica and transitiva most likely derive from 
a sedentary Levantine population source that split at the end of the Younger 
Dryas (YD) (11.7 kya). Since then, however, transitiva received genetic inputs 
from and admixed with both the closely related rustica and the adjacent 
savignii. Demographic analyses confirm this species' strong link with climate 
fluctuations and human activities making it an excellent indicator for 
monitoring and assessing the impact of current global changes on wildlife.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac113
PMCID: PMC9174979
PMID: 35617136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


551. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac111. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac111.

Evolutionary Conservation Genomics Reveals Recent Speciation and Local 
Adaptation in Threatened Takins.

Yang L(1)(2), Wei F(1)(2)(3), Zhan X(1)(3), Fan H(1), Zhao P(4), Huang G(1), 
Chang J(5), Lei Y(4), Hu Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(4)Shaanxi (Louguantai) Rescue and Breeding Center for Rare Wildlife, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese 
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, China.

Incorrect species delimitation will lead to inappropriate conservation 
decisions, especially for threatened species. The takin (Budorcas taxicolor) is 
a large artiodactyl endemic to the Himalayan-Hengduan-Qinling Mountains and is 
well known for its threatened status and peculiar appearance. However, the 
speciation, intraspecies taxonomy, evolutionary history, and adaptive evolution 
of this species still remain unclear, which greatly hampers its scientific 
conservation. Here, we de novo assembled a high-quality chromosome-level genome 
of takin and resequenced the genomes of 75 wild takins. Phylogenomics revealed 
that takin was positioned at the root of Caprinae. Population genomics based on 
the autosome, X chromosome, and Y chromosome SNPs and mitochondrial genomes 
consistently revealed the existence of two phylogenetic species and recent 
speciation in takins: the Himalayan takin (B. taxicolor) and the Chinese takin 
(B. tibetana), with the support of morphological evidence. Two genetically 
divergent subspecies were identified in both takin species, rejecting three 
previously proposed taxonomical viewpoints. Furthermore, their distribution 
boundaries were determined, suggesting that large rivers play important roles in 
shaping the genetic partition. Compared with the other subspecies, the Qinling 
subspecies presented the lowest genomic diversity, higher linkage 
disequilibrium, inbreeding, and genetic load, thus is in urgent need of genetic 
management and protection. Moreover, coat color gene (PMEL) variation may be 
responsible for the adaptive coat color difference between the two species 
following Gloger's rule. Our findings provide novel insights into the recent 
speciation, local adaptation, scientific conservation of takins, and 
biogeography of the Himalaya-Hengduan biodiversity hotspot.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac111
PMCID: PMC9174980
PMID: 35599233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


552. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac109. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac109.

Giant Starship Elements Mobilize Accessory Genes in Fungal Genomes.

Gluck-Thaler E(1)(2), Ralston T(2), Konkel Z(2), Ocampos CG(3), Ganeshan VD(4), 
Dorrance AE(5), Niblack TL(2), Wood CW(1), Slot JC(2), Lopez-Nicora HD(2)(6), 
Vogan AA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias, Universidad Nacional de Asunción, San Lorenzo, 
Paraguay.
(4)Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA.
(5)Department of Plant Pathology, The Ohio State University, Wooster, OH, USA.
(6)Departamento de Producción Agrícola, Universidad San Carlos, Asunción, 
Paraguay.
(7)Systematic Biology, Department of Organismal Biology, University of Uppsala, 
Uppsala, Sweden.

Accessory genes are variably present among members of a species and are a 
reservoir of adaptive functions. In bacteria, differences in gene distributions 
among individuals largely result from mobile elements that acquire and disperse 
accessory genes as cargo. In contrast, the impact of cargo-carrying elements on 
eukaryotic evolution remains largely unknown. Here, we show that variation in 
genome content within multiple fungal species is facilitated by Starships, a 
newly discovered group of massive mobile elements that are 110 kb long on 
average, share conserved components, and carry diverse arrays of accessory 
genes. We identified hundreds of Starship-like regions across every major class 
of filamentous Ascomycetes, including 28 distinct Starships that range from 27 
to 393 kb and last shared a common ancestor ca. 400 Ma. Using new long-read 
assemblies of the plant pathogen Macrophomina phaseolina, we characterize four 
additional Starships whose activities contribute to standing variation in genome 
structure and content. One of these elements, Voyager, inserts into 5S rDNA and 
contains a candidate virulence factor whose increasing copy number has 
contrasting associations with pathogenic and saprophytic growth, suggesting 
Voyager's activity underlies an ecological trade-off. We propose that Starships 
are eukaryotic analogs of bacterial integrative and conjugative elements based 
on parallels between their conserved components and may therefore represent the 
first dedicated agents of active gene transfer in eukaryotes. Our results 
suggest that Starships have shaped the content and structure of fungal genomes 
for millions of years and reveal a new concerted route for evolution throughout 
an entire eukaryotic phylum.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac109
PMCID: PMC9156397
PMID: 35588244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


553. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac105. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac105.

Domain Expansion and Functional Diversification in Vertebrate Reproductive 
Proteins.

Rivera AM(1), Wilburn DB(1)(2), Swanson WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA.

The rapid evolution of fertilization proteins has generated remarkable diversity 
in molecular structure and function. Glycoproteins of vertebrate egg coats 
contain multiple zona pellucida (ZP)-N domains (1-6 copies) that facilitate 
multiple reproductive functions, including species-specific sperm recognition. 
In this report, we integrate phylogenetics and machine learning to investigate 
how ZP-N domains diversify in structure and function. The most C-terminal ZP-N 
domain of each paralog is associated with another domain type (ZP-C), which 
together form a "ZP module." All modular ZP-N domains are phylogenetically 
distinct from nonmodular or free ZP-N domains. Machine learning-based 
classification identifies eight residues that form a stabilizing network in 
modular ZP-N domains that is absent in free domains. Positive selection is 
identified in some free ZP-N domains. Our findings support that strong purifying 
selection has conserved an essential structural core in modular ZP-N domains, 
with the relaxation of this structural constraint allowing free N-terminal 
domains to functionally diversify.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac105
PMCID: PMC9154058
PMID: 35587583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


554. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac084. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac084.

Attribution of Cancer Origins to Endogenous, Exogenous, and Preventable 
Mutational Processes.

Cannataro VL(1), Mandell JD(2), Townsend JP(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Emmanuel College, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 
USA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.

Mutational processes in tumors create distinctive patterns of mutations, 
composed of neutral "passenger" mutations and oncogenic drivers that have 
quantifiable effects on the proliferation and survival of cancer cell lineages. 
Increases in proliferation and survival are mediated by natural selection, which 
can be quantified by comparing the frequency at which we detect substitutions to 
the frequency at which we expect to detect substitutions assuming neutrality. 
Most of the variants detectable with whole-exome sequencing in tumors are 
neutral or nearly neutral in effect, and thus the processes generating the 
majority of mutations may not be the primary sources of the tumorigenic 
mutations. Across 24 cancer types, we identify the contributions of mutational 
processes to each oncogenic variant and quantify the degree to which each 
process contributes to tumorigenesis. We demonstrate that the origination of 
variants driving melanomas and lung cancers is predominantly attributable to the 
preventable, exogenous mutational processes associated with ultraviolet light 
and tobacco exposure, respectively, whereas the origination of selected variants 
in gliomas and prostate adenocarcinomas is largely attributable to endogenous 
processes associated with aging. Preventable mutations associated with pathogen 
exposure and apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme activity account for a large 
proportion of the cancer effect within head-and-neck, bladder, cervical, and 
breast cancers. These attributions complement epidemiological 
approaches-revealing the burden of cancer driven by single-nucleotide variants 
caused by either endogenous or exogenous, nonpreventable, or preventable 
processes, and crucially inform public health strategies.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac084
PMCID: PMC9113445
PMID: 35580068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


555. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac108. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac108.

Population Genetics and Signatures of Selection in Early Neolithic European 
Farmers.

Childebayeva A(1)(2), Rohrlach AB(1)(2)(3), Barquera R(1)(2), Rivollat M(1)(4), 
Aron F(1), Szolek A(5)(6), Kohlbacher O(5)(7)(8)(9), Nicklisch N(10)(11), Alt 
KW(10)(11), Gronenborn D(12), Meller H(11), Friederich S(11), Prüfer K(1)(2), 
Deguilloux MF(4), Krause J(1)(2), Haak W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Archaeogenetics Department, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human 
History, Kahlaische Straße 10, D-07745 Jena, Germany.
(2)Archaeogenetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)ARC Centre of Excellence for Mathematical and Statistical Frontiers, School 
of Mathematical Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
(4)Université de Bordeaux, CNRS, PACEA-UMR 5199, 33615 Pessac, France.
(5)Applied Bioinformatics, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Immunology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, University 
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(7)Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(9)Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(10)Center of Natural and Cultural Human History, Danube Private University, 
Krems-Stein, Austria.
(11)State Office for Heritage Management and Archaeology Saxony-Anhalt - State 
Museum of Prehistory, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(12)Römisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum, Leibniz Research Institute for 
Archaeology, Ernst-Ludwig-Platz 2, 55116 Mainz, Germany.

Human expansion in the course of the Neolithic transition in western Eurasia has 
been one of the major topics in ancient DNA research in the last 10 years. 
Multiple studies have shown that the spread of agriculture and animal husbandry 
from the Near East across Europe was accompanied by large-scale human 
expansions. Moreover, changes in subsistence and migration associated with the 
Neolithic transition have been hypothesized to involve genetic adaptation. Here, 
we present high quality genome-wide data from the Linear Pottery Culture site 
Derenburg-Meerenstieg II (DER) (N = 32 individuals) in Central Germany. 
Population genetic analyses show that the DER individuals carried predominantly 
Anatolian Neolithic-like ancestry and a very limited degree of local 
hunter-gatherer admixture, similar to other early European farmers. Increasing 
the Linear Pottery culture cohort size to ∼100 individuals allowed us to perform 
various frequency- and haplotype-based analyses to investigate signatures of 
selection associated with changes following the adoption of the Neolithic 
lifestyle. In addition, we developed a new method called Admixture-informed 
Maximum-likelihood Estimation for Selection Scans that allowed us test for 
selection signatures in an admixture-aware fashion. Focusing on the intersection 
of results from these selection scans, we identified various loci associated 
with immune function (JAK1, HLA-DQB1) and metabolism (LMF1, LEPR, SORBS1), as 
well as skin color (SLC24A5, CD82) and folate synthesis (MTHFR, NBPF3). Our 
findings shed light on the evolutionary pressures, such as infectious disease 
and changing diet, that were faced by the early farmers of Western Eurasia.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac108
PMCID: PMC9171004
PMID: 35578825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


556. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac106. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac106.

Epistasis Creates Invariant Sites and Modulates the Rate of Molecular Evolution.

Patel R(1)(2), Carnevale V(1)(2), Kumar S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.
(3)Center for Excellence in Genome Medicine and Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Invariant sites are a common feature of amino acid sequence evolution. The 
presence of invariant sites is frequently attributed to the need to preserve 
function through site-specific conservation of amino acid residues. Amino acid 
substitution models without a provision for invariant sites often fit the data 
significantly worse than those that allow for an excess of invariant sites 
beyond those predicted by models that only incorporate rate variation among 
sites (e.g., a Gamma distribution). An alternative is epistasis between sites to 
preserve residue interactions that can create invariant sites. Through 
computer-simulated sequence evolution, we evaluated the relative effects of 
site-specific preferences and site-site couplings in the generation of invariant 
sites and the modulation of the rate of molecular evolution. In an analysis of 
ten major families of protein domains with diverse sequence and functional 
properties, we find that the negative selection imposed by epistasis creates 
many more invariant sites than site-specific residue preferences alone. Further, 
epistasis plays an increasingly larger role in creating invariant sites over 
longer evolutionary periods. Epistasis also dictates rates of domain evolution 
over time by exerting significant additional purifying selection to preserve 
site couplings. These patterns illuminate the mechanistic role of epistasis in 
the processes underlying observed site invariance and evolutionary rates.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac106
PMCID: PMC9156017
PMID: 35575390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


557. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac103. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac103.

SVA Retrotransposons and a Low Copy Repeat in Humans and Great Apes: A Mobile 
Connection.

Damert A(1).

Author information:
(1)Infection Biology Unit and Primate Genetics Laboratory, German Primate 
Center, Leibniz Institute for Primate Research, Göttingen, Germany.

Segmental duplications (SDs) constitute a considerable fraction of primate 
genomes. They contribute to genetic variation and provide raw material for 
evolution. Groups of SDs are characterized by the presence of shared core 
duplicons. One of these core duplicons, low copy repeat (lcr)16a, has been shown 
to be particularly active in the propagation of interspersed SDs in primates. 
The underlying mechanisms are, however, only partially understood. Alu short 
interspersed elements (SINEs) are frequently found at breakpoints and have been 
implicated in the expansion of SDs. Detailed analysis of lcr16a-containing SDs 
shows that the hominid-specific SVA (SINE-R-VNTR-Alu) retrotransposon is an 
integral component of the core duplicon in Asian and African great apes. In 
orang-utan, it provides breakpoints and contributes to both interchromosomal and 
intrachromosomal lcr16a mobility by inter-element recombination. Furthermore, 
the data suggest that in hominines (human, chimpanzee, gorilla) SVA 
recombination-mediated integration of a circular intermediate is the founding 
event of a lineage-specific lcr16a expansion. One of the hominine lcr16a copies 
displays large flanking direct repeats, a structural feature shared by other SDs 
in the human genome. Taken together, the results obtained extend the range of 
SVAs' contribution to genome evolution from RNA-mediated transduction to 
DNA-based recombination. In addition, they provide further support for a role of 
circular intermediates in SD mobilization.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac103
PMCID: PMC9132208
PMID: 35574660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


558. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac102. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac102.

Selection Balancing at Innate Immune Genes: Adaptive Polymorphism Maintenance in 
Toll-Like Receptors.

Minias P(1), Vinkler M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biodiversity Studies and Bioeducation, Faculty of Biology and 
Environmental Protection, University of Łódź, Banacha 1/3, 90-237 Łódź, Poland.
(2)Faculty of Science, Department of Zoology, Charles University, Viničná 7, 128 
43 Prague, Czech Republic.

Balancing selection is a classic mechanism for maintaining variability in immune 
genes involved in host-pathogen interactions. However, it remains unclear how 
widespread the mechanism is across immune genes other than the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC). Although occasional reports suggest that 
balancing selection (heterozygote advantage, negative frequency-dependent 
selection, and fluctuating selection) may act on other immune genes, the current 
understanding of the phenomenon in non-MHC immune genes is far from solid. In 
this review, we focus on Toll-like receptors (TLRs), innate immune genes 
directly involved in pathogen recognition and immune response activation, as 
there is a growing body of research testing the assumptions of balancing 
selection in these genes. After reviewing infection- and fitness-based evidence, 
along with evidence based on population allelic frequencies and heterozygosity 
levels, we conclude that balancing selection maintains variation in TLRs, though 
it tends to occur under specific conditions in certain evolutionary lineages 
rather than being universal and ubiquitous. Our review also identifies key gaps 
in current knowledge and proposes promising areas for future research. Improving 
our understanding of host-pathogen interactions and balancing selection in 
innate immune genes are increasingly important, particularly regarding threats 
from emerging zoonotic diseases.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac102
PMCID: PMC9132207
PMID: 35574644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


559. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac104. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac104.

Genomic Shifts, Phenotypic Clines, and Fitness Costs Associated With Cold 
Tolerance in the Asian Tiger Mosquito.

Sherpa S(1), Tutagata J(1), Gaude T(1), Laporte F(1), Kasai S(2), Ishak IH(3), 
Guo X(4), Shin J(5), Boyer S(6), Marcombe S(7), Chareonviriyaphap T(8), David 
JP(1), Chen XG(4), Zhou X(4), Després L(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Grenoble-Alpes, Université Savoie Mont Blanc, CNRS, Laboratoire 
d'Ecologie Alpine, Grenoble, France.
(2)Department of Medical Entomology, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Insecticide Resistance Research Group (IRRG), Vector Control Research Unit, 
School of Biological Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Minden, Penang, 
Malaysia.
(4)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control for 
Emerging Infectious Diseases of Guangdong Higher Institutes, Guangdong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, Department of Pathogen 
Biology, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Macrogen Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Medical and Veterinary Entomology Unit, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Phnom 
Penh, Cambodia.
(7)Medical Entomology and Vector-Borne Disease Laboratory, Institut Pasteur du 
Laos, Vientiane, Laos.
(8)Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture, Kasetsart University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.

Climatic variation is a key driver of genetic differentiation and phenotypic 
traits evolution, and local adaptation to temperature is expected in widespread 
species. We investigated phenotypic and genomic changes in the native range of 
the Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus. We first refine the phylogeographic 
structure based on genome-wide regions (1,901 double-digest restriction-site 
associated DNA single nucleotide polymophisms [ddRAD SNPs]) from 41 populations. 
We then explore the patterns of cold adaptation using phenotypic traits measured 
in common garden (wing size and cold tolerance) and genotype-temperature 
associations at targeted candidate regions (51,706 exon-capture SNPs) from nine 
populations. We confirm the existence of three evolutionary lineages including 
clades A (Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia, and Laos), B (China and Okinawa), and C 
(South Korea and Japan). We identified temperature-associated differentiation in 
15 out of 221 candidate regions but none in ddRAD regions, supporting the role 
of directional selection in detected genes. These include genes involved in 
lipid metabolism and a circadian clock gene. Most outlier SNPs are differently 
fixed between clades A and C, whereas clade B has an intermediate pattern. 
Females are larger at higher latitude yet produce no more eggs, which might 
favor the storage of energetic reserves in colder climate. Nondiapausing eggs 
from temperate populations survive better to cold exposure than those from 
tropical populations, suggesting they are protected from freezing damages but 
this cold tolerance has a fitness cost in terms of egg viability. Altogether, 
our results provide strong evidence for the thermal adaptation of A. albopictus 
across its wide temperature range.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac104
PMCID: PMC9156037
PMID: 35574643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


560. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac095. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac095.

Real-Time and Remote MCMC Trace Inspection with Beastiary.

Wirth W(1), Duchene S(1).

Author information:
(1)Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.

Bayesian phylogenetics has gained substantial popularity in the last decade, 
with most implementations relying on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC). The 
computational demands of MCMC mean that remote servers are increasingly used. We 
present Beastiary, a package for real-time and remote inspection of log files 
generated by MCMC analyses. Beastiary is an easily deployed web-app that can be 
used to summarize and visualize the output of many popular software packages 
including BEAST, BEAST2, RevBayes, and MrBayes via a web browser. We describe 
the design and implementation of Beastiary and some typical use-cases, with a 
focus on real-time remote monitoring.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac095
PMCID: PMC9156035
PMID: 35552742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


561. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac101. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac101.

Mutation Load in Sunflower Inversions Is Negatively Correlated with Inversion 
Heterozygosity.

Huang K(1), Ostevik KL(1)(2), Elphinstone C(1), Todesco M(1), Bercovich N(1), 
Owens GL(1)(3), Rieseberg LH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Organismal Biology, University of 
California, Riverside, CA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, 
Canada.

Recombination is critical both for accelerating adaptation and purging 
deleterious mutations. Chromosomal inversions can act as recombination modifiers 
that suppress local recombination in heterozygotes and thus, under some 
conditions, are predicted to accumulate such mutations. In this study, we 
investigated patterns of recombination, transposable element abundance, and 
coding sequence evolution across the genomes of 1,445 individuals from three 
sunflower species, as well as within nine inversions segregating within species. 
We also analyzed the effects of inversion genotypes on 87 phenotypic traits to 
test for overdominance. We found significant negative correlations of long 
terminal repeat retrotransposon abundance and deleterious mutations with 
recombination rates across the genome in all three species. However, we failed 
to detect an increase in these features in the inversions, except for a modest 
increase in the proportion of stop codon mutations in several very large or rare 
inversions. Consistent with this finding, there was little evidence of 
overdominance of inversions in phenotypes that may relate to fitness. On the 
other hand, significantly greater load was observed for inversions in 
populations polymorphic for a given inversion compared to populations 
monomorphic for one of the arrangements, suggesting that the local state of 
inversion polymorphism affects deleterious load. These seemingly contradictory 
results can be explained by the low frequency of inversion heterozygotes in wild 
sunflower populations, apparently due to divergent selection and associated 
geographic structure. Inversions contributing to local adaptation represent 
ideal recombination modifiers, acting to facilitate adaptive divergence with 
gene flow, while largely escaping the accumulation of deleterious mutations.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac101
PMCID: PMC9127631
PMID: 35535689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


562. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac097. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac097.

Comparative Genomics Reveals Insights into the Divergent Evolution of Astigmatic 
Mites and Household Pest Adaptations.

Xiong Q(1)(2), Wan AT(1)(2), Liu X(3), Fung CS(1), Xiao X(3), Malainual N(4), 
Hou J(1)(5), Wang L(1), Wang M(1)(2), Yang KY(1)(2), Cui Y(6), Leung EL(7), Nong 
W(8), Shin SK(1), Au SW(8), Jeong KY(9), Chew FT(10), Hui JH(8), Leung TF(11), 
Tungtrongchitr A(4), Zhong N(12), Liu Z(3), Tsui SK(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong.
(2)Hong Kong Bioinformatics Centre, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong.
(3)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Allergy and Immunology, School of Medicine, 
Shenzhen University, China.
(4)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Centre for Microbial Genomics and Proteomics, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Wuxi People's Hospital Affiliated to 
Nanjing Medical University, Wuxi, China.
(7)Macau Institute for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, Macau University 
of Science and Technology, Macau.
(8)School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(9)Institute of Allergy, Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, 
Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(12)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Highly diversified astigmatic mites comprise many medically important human 
household pests such as house dust mites causing ∼1-2% of all allergic diseases 
globally; however, their evolutionary origin and diverse lifestyles including 
reversible parasitism have not been illustrated at the genomic level, which 
hampers allergy prevention and our exploration of these household pests. Using 
six high-quality assembled and annotated genomes, this study not only refuted 
the monophyly of mites and ticks, but also thoroughly explored the divergence of 
Acariformes and the diversification of astigmatic mites. In monophyletic 
Acariformes, Prostigmata known as notorious plant pests first evolved, and then 
rapidly evolving Astigmata diverged from soil oribatid mites. Within astigmatic 
mites, a wide range of gene families rapidly expanded via tandem gene 
duplications, including ionotropic glutamate receptors, triacylglycerol lipases, 
serine proteases and UDP glucuronosyltransferases. Gene diversification after 
tandem duplications provides many genetic resources for adaptation to sensing 
environmental signals, digestion, and detoxification in rapidly changing 
household environments. Many gene decay events only occurred in the 
skin-burrowing parasitic mite Sarcoptes scabiei. Throughout the evolution of 
Acariformes, massive horizontal gene transfer events occurred in gene families 
such as UDP glucuronosyltransferases and several important fungal cell wall 
lytic enzymes, which enable detoxification and digestive functions and provide 
perfect drug targets for pest control. This comparative study sheds light on the 
divergent evolution and quick adaptation to human household environments of 
astigmatic mites and provides insights into the genetic adaptations and even 
control of human household pests.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac097
PMCID: PMC9113151
PMID: 35535514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


563. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac099. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac099.

Parallel Evolution of Ameloblastic scpp Genes in Bony and Cartilaginous 
Vertebrates.

Leurs N(1), Martinand-Mari C(1), Marcellini S(2), Debiais-Thibaud M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier, ISEM, Univ Montpellier, 
CNRS, IRD, Montpellier, France.
(2)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, 
Universidad de Concepción, Concepción, Chile.

In bony vertebrates, skeletal mineralization relies on the secretory 
calcium-binding phosphoproteins (Scpp) family whose members are acidic 
extracellular proteins posttranslationally regulated by the Fam20°C kinase. As 
scpp genes are absent from the elephant shark genome, they are currently thought 
to be specific to bony fishes (osteichthyans). Here, we report a scpp gene 
present in elasmobranchs (sharks and rays) that evolved from local tandem 
duplication of sparc-L 5' exons and show that both genes experienced recent gene 
conversion in sharks. The elasmobranch scpp is remarkably similar to the 
osteichthyan scpp members as they share syntenic and gene structure features, 
code for a conserved signal peptide, tyrosine-rich and aspartate/glutamate-rich 
regions, and harbor putative Fam20°C phosphorylation sites. In addition, the 
catshark scpp is coexpressed with sparc-L and fam20°C in tooth and scale 
ameloblasts, similarly to some osteichthyan scpp genes. Despite these strong 
similarities, molecular clock and phylogenetic data demonstrate that the 
elasmobranch scpp gene originated independently from the osteichthyan scpp gene 
family. Our study reveals convergent events at the sparc-L locus in the two 
sister clades of jawed vertebrates, leading to parallel diversification of the 
skeletal biomineralization toolkit. The molecular evolution of sparc-L and its 
coexpression with fam20°C in catshark ameloblasts provides a unifying genetic 
basis that suggests that all convergent scpp duplicates inherited similar 
features from their sparc-L precursor. This conclusion supports a single origin 
for the hypermineralized outer odontode layer as produced by an ancestral 
developmental process performed by Sparc-L, implying the homology of the enamel 
and enameloid tissues in all vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac099
PMCID: PMC9122587
PMID: 35535508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


564. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac100. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac100.

Earliest Photic Zone Niches Probed by Ancestral Microbial Rhodopsins.

Sephus CD(1), Fer E(1)(2)(3), Garcia AK(1)(2), Adam ZR(4)(5), Schwieterman 
EW(5)(6), Kacar B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)NASA Center for Early Life and Evolution, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 
USA.
(3)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, USA.
(4)Department of Geoscience, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of California, 
Riverside, CA, USA.

For billions of years, life has continuously adapted to dynamic physical 
conditions near the Earth's surface. Fossils and other preserved biosignatures 
in the paleontological record are the most direct evidence for reconstructing 
the broad historical contours of this adaptive interplay. However, biosignatures 
dating to Earth's earliest history are exceedingly rare. Here, we combine 
phylogenetic inference of primordial rhodopsin proteins with modeled spectral 
features of the Precambrian Earth environment to reconstruct the paleobiological 
history of this essential family of photoactive transmembrane proteins. Our 
results suggest that ancestral microbial rhodopsins likely acted as light-driven 
proton pumps and were spectrally tuned toward the absorption of green light, 
which would have enabled their hosts to occupy depths in a water column or 
biofilm where UV wavelengths were attenuated. Subsequent diversification of 
rhodopsin functions and peak absorption frequencies was enabled by the expansion 
of surface ecological niches induced by the accumulation of atmospheric oxygen. 
Inferred ancestors retain distinct associations between extant functions and 
peak absorption frequencies. Our findings suggest that novel information encoded 
by biomolecules can be used as "paleosensors" for conditions of ancient, 
inhabited niches of host organisms not represented elsewhere in the 
paleontological record. The coupling of functional diversification and spectral 
tuning of this taxonomically diverse protein family underscores the utility of 
rhodopsins as universal testbeds for inferring remotely detectable biosignatures 
on inhabited planetary bodies.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac100
PMCID: PMC9117797
PMID: 35524714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


565. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac098. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac098.

PRD-Class Homeobox Genes in Bovine Early Embryos: Function, Evolution, and 
Overlapping Roles.

Lewin TD(1), Fouladi-Nashta AA(2), Holland PWH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, 11a Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1 
3SZ, UK.
(2)Comparative Biomedical Sciences Department, Royal Veterinary College, 
Hawkshead Campus, North Mymms, Hatfield, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK.

Eutherian Totipotent Cell Homeobox (ETCHbox) genes are mammalian-specific 
PRD-class homeobox genes with conserved expression in the preimplantation embryo 
but fast-evolving and highly divergent sequences. Here, we exploit an ectopic 
expression approach to examine the role of bovine ETCHbox genes and show that 
ARGFX and LEUTX homeodomain proteins upregulate genes normally expressed in the 
blastocyst; the identities of the regulated genes suggest that, in vivo, the 
ETCHbox genes play a role in coordinating the physical formation of the 
blastocyst structure. Both genes also downregulate genes expressed earlier 
during development and genes associated with an undifferentiated cell state, 
possibly via the JAK/STAT pathway. We find evidence that bovine ARGFX and LEUTX 
have overlapping functions, in contrast to their antagonistic roles in humans. 
Finally, we characterize a mutant bovine ARGFX allele which eliminates the 
homeodomain and show that homozygous mutants are viable. These data support the 
hypothesis of functional overlap between ETCHbox genes within a species, roles 
for ETCHbox genes in blastocyst formation and the change of their functions over 
evolutionary time.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac098
PMCID: PMC9117796
PMID: 35512670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


566. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac096. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac096.

Evolution, Expression Patterns, and Distribution of Novel Ribbon Worm Predatory 
and Defensive Toxins.

Verdes A(1)(2), Taboada S(2)(3), Hamilton BR(4)(5), Undheim EAB(4)(6)(7), Sonoda 
GG(8), Andrade SCS(8), Morato E(9), Marina AI(9), Cárdenas CA(10)(11), Riesgo 
A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology, Museo Nacional de 
Ciencias Naturales (MNCN), CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, UK.
(3)Departament of Biodiversity, Ecology, and Evolution, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Centre for Advanced Imaging, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.
(5)Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(6)Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, Department of Biosciences, 
University of Oslo, PO Box 1066, Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
(7)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
QLD, Australia.
(8)Departmento de Genética e Biología Evolutiva, University of Sao Paulo, Sao 
Paulo, Brazil.
(9)CBMSO Protein Chemistry Facility, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.
(10)Departamento Científico, Instituto Antártico Chileno, Punta Arenas, Chile.
(11)Millennium Institute Biodiversity of Antarctic and Subantarctic Ecosystems 
(BASE), Santiago, Chile.

Ribbon worms are active predators that use an eversible proboscis to inject 
venom into their prey and defend themselves with toxic epidermal secretions. 
Previous work on nemertean venom has largely focused on just a few species and 
has not investigated the different predatory and defensive secretions in detail. 
Consequently, our understanding of the composition and evolution of ribbon worm 
venoms is still very limited. Here, we present a comparative study of nemertean 
venom combining RNA-seq differential gene expression analyses of venom-producing 
tissues, tandem mass spectrometry-based proteomics of toxic secretions, and mass 
spectrometry imaging of proboscis sections, to shed light onto the composition 
and evolution of predatory and defensive toxic secretions in Antarctonemertes 
valida. Our analyses reveal a wide diversity of putative defensive and predatory 
toxins with tissue-specific gene expression patterns and restricted 
distributions to the mucus and proboscis proteomes respectively, suggesting that 
ribbon worms produce distinct toxin cocktails for predation and defense. Our 
results also highlight the presence of numerous lineage-specific toxins, 
indicating that venom evolution is highly divergent across nemerteans, producing 
toxin cocktails that might be finely tuned to subdue different prey. Our data 
also suggest that the hoplonemertean proboscis is a highly specialized predatory 
organ that seems to be involved in a variety of biological functions besides 
predation, including secretion and sensory perception. Overall, our results 
advance our knowledge into the diversity and evolution of nemertean venoms and 
highlight the importance of combining different types of data to characterize 
toxin composition in understudied venomous organisms.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac096
PMCID: PMC9132205
PMID: 35512366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


567. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac094. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac094.

Genomic Impact of Whaling in North Atlantic Fin Whales.

Wolf M(1)(2), de Jong M(1), Halldórsson SD(3), Árnason Ú(4)(5), Janke 
A(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Senckenberg Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BiK-F), 
Georg-Voigt-Strasse 14-16, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(2)Institute for Ecology, Evolution and Diversity, Goethe University, 
Max-von-Laue-Strasse. 9, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(3)Marine and Freshwater Research Institute, Fornubúðir 5, IS 220 Hafnarfjörður, 
Iceland.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Sweden.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Skane University Hospital in Lund, Sweden.
(6)LOEWE-Centre for Translational Biodiversity Genomics (TBG), Senckenberg 
Nature Research Society, Georg-Voigt-Straße 14-16, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

It is generally recognized that large-scale whaling in the 19th and 20th century 
led to a substantial reduction of the size of many cetacean populations, 
particularly those of the baleen whales (Mysticeti). The impact of these 
operations on genomic diversity of one of the most hunted whales, the fin whale 
(Balaenoptera physalus), has remained largely unaddressed because of the paucity 
of adequate samples and the limitation of applicable techniques. Here, we have 
examined the effect of whaling on the North Atlantic fin whale based on genomes 
of 51 individuals from Icelandic waters, representing three temporally separated 
intervals, 1989, 2009 and 2018 and provide a reference genome for the species. 
Demographic models suggest a noticeable drop of the effective population size of 
the North Atlantic fin whale around a century ago. The present results suggest 
that the genome-wide heterozygosity is not markedly reduced and has remained 
comparable with other baleen whale species. Similarly, there are no signs of 
apparent inbreeding, as measured by the proportion of long runs of homozygosity, 
or of a distinctively increased mutational load, as measured by the amount of 
putative deleterious mutations. Compared with other baleen whales, the North 
Atlantic fin whale appears to be less affected by anthropogenic influences than 
other whales such as the North Atlantic right whale, consistent with the 
presence of long runs of homozygosity and higher levels of mutational load in an 
otherwise more heterozygous genome. Thus, genome-wide assessments of other 
species and populations are essential for future, more specific, conservation 
efforts.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac094
PMCID: PMC9113106
PMID: 35512360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


568. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac092. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac092.

AliSim: A Fast and Versatile Phylogenetic Sequence Simulator for the Genomic 
Era.

Ly-Trong N(1), Naser-Khdour S(2), Lanfear R(2), Minh BQ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Computing, College of Engineering and Computer Science, Australian 
National University, Canberra, ACT 2600, Australia.
(2)Ecology and Evolution, Research School of Biology, College of Science, 
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2600, Australia.

Sequence simulators play an important role in phylogenetics. Simulated data has 
many applications, such as evaluating the performance of different methods, 
hypothesis testing with parametric bootstraps, and, more recently, generating 
data for training machine-learning applications. Many sequence simulation 
programmes exist, but the most feature-rich programmes tend to be rather slow, 
and the fastest programmes tend to be feature-poor. Here, we introduce AliSim, a 
new tool that can efficiently simulate biologically realistic alignments under a 
large range of complex evolutionary models. To achieve high performance across a 
wide range of simulation conditions, AliSim implements an adaptive approach that 
combines the commonly used rate matrix and probability matrix approaches. AliSim 
takes 1.4 h and 1.3 GB RAM to simulate alignments with one million sequences or 
sites, whereas popular software Seq-Gen, Dawg, and INDELible require 2-5 h and 
50-500 GB of RAM. We provide AliSim as an extension of the IQ-TREE software 
version 2.2, freely available at www.iqtree.org, and a comprehensive user 
tutorial at http://www.iqtree.org/doc/AliSim.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac092
PMCID: PMC9113491
PMID: 35511713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


569. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac091. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac091.

Genetic and Structural Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein for Universal 
Epitope Selection.

Markosian C(1)(2), Staquicini DI(1)(2), Dogra P(3)(4), Dodero-Rojas E(5), Lubin 
JH(6), Tang FHF(1)(2), Smith TL(1)(2), Contessoto VG(5), Libutti SK(7)(8), Wang 
Z(3)(4), Cristini V(3)(9)(10)(11), Khare SD(6)(7)(12), Whitford PC(13), Burley 
SK(6)(7)(12)(14)(15), Onuchic JN(5)(16)(17)(18), Pasqualini R(1)(2), Arap 
W(1)(19).

Author information:
(1)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07101, USA.
(2)Division of Cancer Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology, Rutgers New 
Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
(3)Mathematics in Medicine Program, Houston Methodist Research Institute, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY 10022, USA.
(5)Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, TX 
77005, USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Rutgers, The State University 
of New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(7)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
(8)Department of Surgery, Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New 
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
(9)Neal Cancer Center, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA.
(10)Department of Imaging Physics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(11)Physiology, Biophysics, and Systems Biology Program, Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10022, USA.
(12)Institute for Quantitative Biomedicine, Rutgers, The State University of New 
Jersey, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(13)Department of Physics and Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, 
Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(14)RCSB Protein Data Bank, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.
(15)RCSB Protein Data Bank, San Diego Supercomputer Center, and Skaggs School of 
Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA 92067, USA.
(16)Department of Biosciences, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA.
(17)Department of Chemistry, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA.
(18)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, 
USA.
(19)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Rutgers New Jersey 
Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Aug 30;:

Evaluation of immunogenic epitopes for universal vaccine development in the face 
of ongoing SARS-CoV-2 evolution remains a challenge. Herein, we investigate the 
genetic and structural conservation of an immunogenically relevant epitope 
(C662-C671) of spike (S) protein across SARS-CoV-2 variants to determine its 
potential utility as a broad-spectrum vaccine candidate against coronavirus 
diseases. Comparative sequence analysis, structural assessment, and molecular 
dynamics simulations of C662-C671 epitope were performed. Mathematical tools 
were employed to determine its mutational cost. We found that the amino acid 
sequence of C662-C671 epitope is entirely conserved across the observed major 
variants of SARS-CoV-2 in addition to SARS-CoV. Its conformation and 
accessibility are predicted to be conserved, even in the highly mutated Omicron 
variant. Costly mutational rate in the context of energy expenditure in genome 
replication and translation can explain this strict conservation. These 
observations may herald an approach to developing vaccine candidates for 
universal protection against emergent variants of coronavirus.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac091
PMCID: PMC9129195
PMID: 35511693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


570. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac093. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac093.

Molecular Phylogeny Reveals the Past Transoceanic Voyages of Drywood Termites 
(Isoptera, Kalotermitidae).

Buček A(1), Wang M(1), Šobotník J(2), Hellemans S(1), Sillam-Dussès D(2)(3), 
Mizumoto N(1), Stiblík P(2), Clitheroe C(1), Lu T(4), González Plaza JJ(5), 
Mohagan A(6)(7), Rafanomezantsoa JJ(8), Fisher B(8)(9), Engel MS(10)(11), Roisin 
Y(12), Evans TA(13), Scheffrahn R(14), Bourguignon T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, 1919-1 
Tancha, Onna-son, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Tropical AgriSciences, Czech University of Life Sciences, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Laboratory of Experimental and Comparative Ethology, UR 4443, University 
Sorbonne Paris Nord, Villetaneuse, France.
(4)Total Hadbara, Gedera, Israel.
(5)International Research Centre in Critical Raw Materials-ICCRAM, University of 
Burgos, Plaza Misael Bañuelos s/n, 09001 Burgos, Spain.
(6)Center for Biodiversity Research and Extension in Mindanao, Central Mindanao 
University, Musuan, Maramag, Bukidnon 8710, Philippines.
(7)Department of Biology, College of Arts and Sciences, Central Mindanao 
University, Musuan, Maramag, Bukidnon 8710, Philippines.
(8)Madagascar Biodiversity Center, Parc Botanique et Zoologique de Tsimbazaza, 
Antananarivo, Madagascar.
(9)California Academy of the Sciences, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Kansas, 
Lawrence, KS, USA.
(11)Division of Entomology, Natural History Museum, University of Kansas, 
Lawrence, KS, USA.
(12)Evolutionary Biology and Ecology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, 
Belgium.
(13)School of Biological Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, WA 
6009, Australia.
(14)Fort Lauderdale Research and Education Center, Institute for Food and 
Agricultural Sciences, 3205 College Avenue, Davie, FL 33314, USA.

Termites are major decomposers in terrestrial ecosystems and the second most 
diverse lineage of social insects. The Kalotermitidae form the second-largest 
termite family and are distributed across tropical and subtropical ecosystems, 
where they typically live in small colonies confined to single wood items 
inhabited by individuals with no foraging abilities. How the Kalotermitidae have 
acquired their global distribution patterns remains unresolved. Similarly, it is 
unclear whether foraging is ancestral to Kalotermitidae or was secondarily 
acquired in a few species. These questions can be addressed in a phylogenetic 
framework. We inferred time-calibrated phylogenetic trees of Kalotermitidae 
using mitochondrial genomes of ∼120 species, about 27% of kalotermitid 
diversity, including representatives of 21 of the 23 kalotermitid genera. Our 
mitochondrial genome phylogenetic trees were corroborated by phylogenies 
inferred from nuclear ultraconserved elements derived from a subset of 28 
species. We found that extant kalotermitids shared a common ancestor 84 Ma 
(75-93 Ma 95% highest posterior density), indicating that a few disjunctions 
among early-diverging kalotermitid lineages may predate Gondwana breakup. 
However, most of the ∼40 disjunctions among biogeographic realms were dated at 
<50 Ma, indicating that transoceanic dispersals, and more recently 
human-mediated dispersals, have been the major drivers of the global 
distribution of Kalotermitidae. Our phylogeny also revealed that the capacity to 
forage is often found in early-diverging kalotermitid lineages, implying the 
ancestors of Kalotermitidae were able to forage among multiple wood pieces. Our 
phylogenetic estimates provide a platform for critical taxonomic revision and 
future comparative analyses of Kalotermitidae.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac093
PMCID: PMC9113494
PMID: 35511685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


571. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac086. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac086.

Prediction of Antibiotic Resistance Evolution by Growth Measurement of All 
Proximal Mutants of Beta-Lactamase.

Feng S(1)(2), Wu Z(3), Liang W(1)(2), Zhang X(3), Cai X(4), Li J(1)(2), Liang 
L(1)(2), Lin D(1)(2), Stoesser N(5), Doi Y(6)(7)(8), Zhong LL(1)(2), Liu Y(9), 
Xia Y(10), Dai M(11), Zhang L(12), Chen X(4), Yang JR(2)(3)(13), Tian 
GB(1)(2)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Diseases Control, Sun Yat-sen University, Ministry 
of Education, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(4)Department of Genetics and Cellular Biology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(5)Modernising Medical Microbiology, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh 15261, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 
Aichi 470-1192, Japan.
(8)Department of Infectious Diseases, Fujita Health University School of 
Medicine, Aichi 470-1192, Japan.
(9)Clinical Laboratory, Fifth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Zhuhai 519000, China.
(10)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Third Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(11)School of Laboratory Medicine, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu 610500, 
China.
(12)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Guangdong Provincial People's 
Hospital/Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, 
China.
(13)RNA Biomedical Institute, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
(14)School of Medicine, Xizang Minzu University, Xianyang, Shaanxi 712082, 
China.

The antibiotic resistance crisis continues to threaten human health. Better 
predictions of the evolution of antibiotic resistance genes could contribute to 
the design of more sustainable treatment strategies. However, comprehensive 
prediction of antibiotic resistance gene evolution via laboratory approaches 
remains challenging. By combining site-specific integration and high-throughput 
sequencing, we quantified relative growth under the respective selection of 
cefotaxime or ceftazidime selection in ∼23,000 Escherichia coli MG1655 strains 
that each carried a unique, single-copy variant of the extended-spectrum 
β-lactamase gene blaCTX-M-14 at the chromosomal att HK022 site. Significant 
synergistic pleiotropy was observed within four subgenic regions, suggesting key 
regions for the evolution of resistance to both antibiotics. Moreover, we 
propose PEARP and PEARR, two deep-learning models with strong clinical 
correlations, for the prospective and retrospective prediction of blaCTX-M-14 
evolution, respectively. Single to quintuple mutations of blaCTX-M-14 predicted 
to confer resistance by PEARP were significantly enriched among the clinical 
isolates harboring blaCTX-M-14 variants, and the PEARR scores matched the 
minimal inhibitory concentrations obtained for the 31 intermediates in all 
hypothetical trajectories. Altogether, we conclude that the measurement of local 
fitness landscape enables prediction of the evolutionary trajectories of 
antibiotic resistance genes, which could be useful for a broad range of clinical 
applications, from resistance prediction to designing novel treatment 
strategies.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac086
PMCID: PMC9087888
PMID: 35485492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


572. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac080. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac080.

Dynamics and Impacts of Transposable Element Proliferation in the Drosophila 
nasuta Species Group Radiation.

Wei KH(1), Mai D(1), Chatla K(1), Bachtrog D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Transposable element (TE) mobilization is a constant threat to genome integrity. 
Eukaryotic organisms have evolved robust defensive mechanisms to suppress their 
activity, yet TEs can escape suppression and proliferate, creating strong 
selective pressure for host defense to adapt. This genomic conflict fuels a 
never-ending arms race that drives the rapid evolution of TEs and recurrent 
positive selection of genes involved in host defense; the latter has been shown 
to contribute to postzygotic hybrid incompatibility. However, how TE 
proliferation impacts genome and regulatory divergence remains poorly 
understood. Here, we report the highly complete and contiguous 
(N50 = 33.8-38.0 Mb) genome assemblies of seven closely related Drosophila 
species that belong to the nasuta species group-a poorly studied group of flies 
that radiated in the last 2 My. We constructed a high-quality de novo TE library 
and gathered germline RNA-seq data, which allowed us to comprehensively annotate 
and compare TE insertion patterns between the species, and infer the 
evolutionary forces controlling their spread. We find a strong negative 
association between TE insertion frequency and expression of genes nearby; this 
likely reflects survivor bias from reduced fitness impact of TEs inserting near 
lowly expressed, nonessential genes, with limited TE-induced epigenetic 
silencing. Phylogenetic analyses of insertions of 147 TE families reveal that 
53% of them show recent amplification in at least one species. The most highly 
amplified TE is a nonautonomous DNA element (Drosophila INterspersed Element; 
DINE) which has gone through multiple bouts of expansions with thousands of 
full-length copies littered throughout each genome. Across all TEs, we find that 
TEs expansions are significantly associated with high expression in the expanded 
species consistent with suppression escape. Thus, whereas horizontal transfer 
followed by the invasion of a naïve genome has been highlighted to explain the 
long-term survival of TEs, our analysis suggests that evasion of host 
suppression of resident TEs is a major strategy to persist over evolutionary 
times. Altogether, our results shed light on the heterogenous and 
context-dependent nature in which TEs affect gene regulation and the dynamics of 
rampant TE proliferation amidst a recently radiated species group.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac080
PMCID: PMC9075770
PMID: 35485457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


573. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac085. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac085.

Lifestyle Transitions in Fusarioid Fungi are Frequent and Lack Clear Genomic 
Signatures.

Hill R(1)(2), Buggs RJA(1)(2), Vu DT(3), Gaya E(1).

Author information:
(1)Comparative Fungal Biology, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, Jodrell Laboratory, 
Richmond, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences, Queen Mary University of 
London, London, UK.
(3)Research Planning and International Cooperation Department, Plant Resources 
Center, Hanoi, Vietnam.

The fungal genus Fusarium (Ascomycota) includes well-known plant pathogens that 
are implicated in diseases worldwide, and many of which have been genome 
sequenced. The genus also encompasses other diverse lifestyles, including 
species found ubiquitously as asymptomatic-plant inhabitants (endophytes). Here, 
we produced structurally annotated genome assemblies for five endophytic 
Fusarium strains, including the first whole-genome data for Fusarium chuoi. 
Phylogenomic reconstruction of Fusarium and closely related genera revealed 
multiple and frequent lifestyle transitions, the major exception being a 
monophyletic clade of mutualist insect symbionts. Differential codon usage bias 
and increased codon optimisation separated Fusarium sensu stricto from allied 
genera. We performed computational prediction of candidate secreted effector 
proteins (CSEPs) and carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes)-both likely to be 
involved in the host-fungal interaction-and sought evidence that their 
frequencies could predict lifestyle. However, phylogenetic distance described 
gene variance better than lifestyle did. There was no significant difference in 
CSEP, CAZyme, or gene repertoires between phytopathogenic and endophytic 
strains, although we did find some evidence that gene copy number variation may 
be contributing to pathogenicity. Large numbers of accessory CSEPs (i.e., 
present in more than one taxon but not all) and a comparatively low number of 
strain-specific CSEPs suggested there is a limited specialisation among plant 
associated Fusarium species. We also found half of the core genes to be under 
positive selection and identified specific CSEPs and CAZymes predicted to be 
positively selected on certain lineages. Our results depict fusarioid fungi as 
prolific generalists and highlight the difficulty in predicting pathogenic 
potential in the group.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac085
PMCID: PMC9051438
PMID: 35484861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


574. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac087. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac087.

Low Complexity Regions in Mammalian Proteins are Associated with Low Protein 
Abundance and High Transcript Abundance.

Dickson ZW(1), Golding GB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Low Complexity Regions (LCRs) are present in a surprisingly large number of 
eukaryotic proteins. These highly repetitive and compositionally biased 
sequences are often structurally disordered, bind promiscuously, and evolve 
rapidly. Frequently studied in terms of evolutionary dynamics, little is known 
about how LCRs affect the expression of the proteins which contain them. It 
would be expected that rapidly evolving LCRs are unlikely to be tolerated in 
strongly conserved, highly abundant proteins, leading to lower overall abundance 
in proteins which contain LCRs. To test this hypothesis and examine the 
associations of protein abundance and transcript abundance with the presence of 
LCRs, we have integrated high-throughput data from across mammals. We have found 
that LCRs are indeed associated with reduced protein abundance, but are also 
associated with elevated transcript abundance. These associations are 
qualitatively consistent across 12 human tissues and nine mammalian species. The 
differential impacts of LCRs on abundance at the protein and transcript level 
are not explained by differences in either protein degradation rates or the 
inefficiency of translation for LCR containing proteins. We suggest that rapidly 
evolving LCRs are a source of selective pressure on the regulatory mechanisms 
which maintain steady-state protein abundance levels.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac087
PMCID: PMC9070799
PMID: 35482425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


575. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac090. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac090.

A Genetic Bottleneck of Mitochondrial DNA During Human Lymphocyte Development.

Tang Z(1), Lu Z(2), Chen B(1), Zhang W(1), Chang HY(3)(4), Hu Z(2), Xu J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of 
Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Center for Personal Dynamic Regulomes, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

Mitochondria are essential organelles in eukaryotic cells that provide critical 
support for energetic and metabolic homeostasis. Although the elimination of 
pathogenic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations in somatic cells has been 
observed, the mechanisms to maintain proper functions despite their mtDNA 
mutation load are poorly understood. In this study, we analyzed somatic mtDNA 
mutations in more than 30,000 single human peripheral and bone marrow 
mononuclear cells. We observed a significant overrepresentation of homoplasmic 
mtDNA mutations in B, T, and natural killer (NK) lymphocytes. Intriguingly, 
their overall mutational burden was lower than that in hematopoietic progenitors 
and myeloid cells. This characteristic mtDNA mutational landscape indicates a 
genetic bottleneck during lymphoid development, as confirmed with single-cell 
datasets from multiple platforms and individuals. We further demonstrated that 
mtDNA replication lags behind cell proliferation in both pro-B and pre-B 
progenitor cells, thus likely causing the genetic bottleneck by diluting mtDNA 
copies per cell. Through computational simulations and approximate Bayesian 
computation (ABC), we recapitulated this lymphocyte-specific mutational 
landscape and estimated the minimal mtDNA copies as <30 in T, B, and NK 
lineages. Our integrative analysis revealed a novel process of a 
lymphoid-specific mtDNA genetic bottleneck, thus illuminating a potential 
mechanism used by highly metabolically active immune cells to limit their mtDNA 
mutation load.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac090
PMCID: PMC9113143
PMID: 35482398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


576. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac089. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac089.

Climate Warming Since the Holocene Accelerates West-East Communication for the 
Eurasian Temperate Water Strider Species Aquarius paludum.

Ye Z(1), Yuan J(2), Damgaard J(3), Berchi GM(4)(5), Cianferoni F(6)(7), Pintar 
MR(8), Olosutean H(9), Zhu X(1), Jiang K(1), Yang X(10), Fu S(1), Bu W(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Entomology, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, 94 
Weijin Road, Tianjin 300071, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Zaozhuang University, 1 Beian Road, Shandong 
277000, China.
(3)Natural History Museum of Denmark, Zoological Museum, Universitetsparken 15, 
2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.
(4)Department of Taxonomy & Ecology, Faculty of Biology & Geology, Babeş-Bolyai 
University, 5-7 Clinicilor Street, 400015 Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(5)Institute for Advanced Environmental Research, West University of Timișoara, 
4 Oituz Street, 300086 Timișoara, Romania.
(6)Research Institute on Terrestrial Ecosystems, National Research Council of 
Italy, Via Madonna del Piano 10, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy.
(7)Zoology, "La Specola", Natural History Museum, University of Florence, Via 
Romana 17, I-50125 Florence, Italy.
(8)Institute of Environment, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA.
(9)Applied Ecology Research Center, Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu, 5-7 Ion 
Ratiu Street, 550012 Sibiu, Romania.
(10)School of Sports, Taiyuan University of Science and Technology, 66 Waliu 
Road, Shanxi 030024, China.

Holocene climate warming has dramatically altered biological diversity and 
distributions. Recent human-induced emissions of greenhouse gases will 
exacerbate global warming and thus induce threats to cold-adapted taxa. However, 
the impacts of this major climate change on transcontinental temperate species 
are still poorly understood. Here, we generated extensive genomic datasets for a 
water strider, Aquarius paludum, which was sampled across its entire 
distribution in Eurasia and used these datasets in combination with ecological 
niche modeling (ENM) to elucidate the influence of the Holocene and future 
climate warming on its population structure and demographic history. We found 
that A. paludum consisted of two phylogeographic lineages that diverged in the 
middle Pleistocene, which resulted in a "west-east component" genetic pattern 
that was probably triggered by Central Asia-Mongoxin aridification and 
Pleistocene glaciations. The diverged western and eastern lineages had a second 
contact in the Holocene, which shaped a temporary hybrid zone located at the 
boundary of the arid-semiarid regions of China. Future predictions detected a 
potentially novel northern corridor to connect the western and eastern 
populations, indicating west-east gene flow would possibly continue to intensify 
under future warming climate conditions. Further integrating phylogeographic and 
ENM analyses of multiple Eurasian temperate taxa based on published studies 
reinforced our findings on the "west-east component" genetic pattern and the 
predicted future northern corridor for A. paludum. Our study provided a detailed 
paradigm from a phylogeographic perspective of how transcontinental temperate 
species differ from cold-adapted taxa in their response to climate warming.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac089
PMCID: PMC9087890
PMID: 35482393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


577. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac076. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac076.

Disentangling Signatures of Selection Before and After European Colonization in 
Latin Americans.

Mendoza-Revilla J(1)(2)(3), Chacón-Duque JC(4)(5), Fuentes-Guajardo M(6), Ormond 
L(1), Wang K(1)(7), Hurtado M(3), Villegas V(3), Granja V(3), Acuña-Alonzo V(8), 
Jaramillo C(9), Arias W(9), Barquera R(7)(8), Gómez-Valdés J(8), 
Villamil-Ramírez H(10)(11), Silva de Cerqueira CC(12), Badillo Rivera KM(13), 
Nieves-Colón MA(14), Gignoux CR(15), Wojcik GL(16), Moreno-Estrada A(17), 
Hünemeier T(12)(18), Ramallo V(12)(19), Schuler-Faccini L(12), Gonzalez-José 
R(19), Bortolini MC(12), Canizales-Quinteros S(10)(11), Gallo C(3), Poletti 
G(3), Bedoya G(9), Rothhammer F(20), Balding D(1)(21), Fumagalli M(22), Adhikari 
K(23), Ruiz-Linares A(1)(24)(25), Hellenthal G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, and UCL Genetics 
Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Human Evolutionary Genetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, UMR2000, CNRS, Paris, 
France.
(3)Laboratorios de Investigación y Desarrollo, Facultad de Ciencias y Filosofía, 
Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Perú.
(4)Centre for Palaeogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Archaeology and Classical Studies, Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Departamento de Tecnología Médica, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, 
Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica, Chile.
(7)Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(8)National School of Anthropology and History, Mexico City, Mexico.
(9)GENMOL (Genética Molecular), Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(10)Unidad de Genómica de Poblaciones Aplicada a la Salud, Facultad de Química, 
UNAM-Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico City, Mexico.
(11)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México e Instituto Nacional de Medicina 
Genómica, Mexico City, Mexico.
(12)Departamento de Genética, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil.
(13)Department of Genetics, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Anthropology, University of Minnesota Twin Cities, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(15)Department of Biostatistics and Informatics, University of Colorado Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(16)Bloomberg School of Public Health, John Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.
(17)Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la Biodiversidad (UGA-LANGEBIO), 
CINVESTAV, Irapuato, Guanajuato, Mexico.
(18)Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, University of São Paulo, 
São Paulo, Brazil.
(19)Instituto Patagónico de Ciencias Sociales y Humanas-Centro Nacional 
Patagónico, CONICET, Puerto Madryn, Argentina.
(20)Instituto de Alta Investigación, Universidad de Tarapacá, Arica, Chile.
(21)Schools of BioSciences and Mathematics & Statistics, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(22)School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences, Queen Mary University of 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(23)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Faculty of Science, Technology, 
Engineering and Mathematics, The Open University, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom.
(24)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology and 
Collaborative Innovation Center of Genetics and Development, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(25)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, EFS, ADES, Marseille, France.

Throughout human evolutionary history, large-scale migrations have led to 
intermixing (i.e., admixture) between previously separated human groups. 
Although classical and recent work have shown that studying admixture can yield 
novel historical insights, the extent to which this process contributed to 
adaptation remains underexplored. Here, we introduce a novel statistical model, 
specific to admixed populations, that identifies loci under selection while 
determining whether the selection likely occurred post-admixture or prior to 
admixture in one of the ancestral source populations. Through extensive 
simulations, we show that this method is able to detect selection, even in 
recently formed admixed populations, and to accurately differentiate between 
selection occurring in the ancestral or admixed population. We apply this method 
to genome-wide SNP data of ∼4,000 individuals in five admixed Latin American 
cohorts from Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru. Our approach replicates 
previous reports of selection in the human leukocyte antigen region that are 
consistent with selection post-admixture. We also report novel signals of 
selection in genomic regions spanning 47 genes, reinforcing many of these 
signals with an alternative, commonly used local-ancestry-inference approach. 
These signals include several genes involved in immunity, which may reflect 
responses to endemic pathogens of the Americas and to the challenge of 
infectious disease brought by European contact. In addition, some of the 
strongest signals inferred to be under selection in the Native American 
ancestral groups of modern Latin Americans overlap with genes implicated in 
energy metabolism phenotypes, plausibly reflecting adaptations to novel dietary 
sources available in the Americas.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac076
PMCID: PMC9034689
PMID: 35460423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


578. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac081. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac081.

Rates of Mutations and Transcript Errors in the Foodborne Pathogen Salmonella 
enterica subsp. enterica.

Pan J(1)(2), Li W(3), Ni J(1), Wu K(1), Konigsberg I(4), Rivera CE(3), Tincher 
C(3), Gregory C(3), Zhou X(1), Doak TG(3)(5), Lee H(6), Wang Y(1), Gao X(7), 
Lynch M(8), Long H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolution and Marine Biodiversity, KLMME, Ocean University of 
China, 5 Yushan Road, Qingdao, Shandong Province 266003, China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Qingdao Pilot National 
Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao 266237, China.
(3)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.
(4)Division of Biomedical Informatics & Personalized Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(5)National Center for Genome Analysis Support, Indiana University, Bloomington, 
IN 47405, USA.
(6)School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, AZ 85281, USA.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Microbial Technology Institute, 
School of Life Science, Shandong University, No. 72 Binhai Road, Qingdao, 
Shandong Province 266237, China.
(8)Biodesign Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, AZ 85281, USA.

Because errors at the DNA level power pathogen evolution, a systematic 
understanding of the rate and molecular spectra of mutations could guide the 
avoidance and treatment of infectious diseases. We thus accumulated tens of 
thousands of spontaneous mutations in 768 repeatedly bottlenecked lineages of 18 
strains from various geographical sites, temporal spread, and genetic 
backgrounds. Entailing over ∼1.36 million generations, the resultant data yield 
an average mutation rate of ∼0.0005 per genome per generation, with a 
significant within-species variation. This is one of the lowest bacterial 
mutation rates reported, giving direct support for a high genome stability in 
this pathogen resulting from high DNA-mismatch-repair efficiency and 
replication-machinery fidelity. Pathogenicity genes do not exhibit an 
accelerated mutation rate, and thus, elevated mutation rates may not be the 
major determinant for the diversification of toxin and secretion systems. 
Intriguingly, a low error rate at the transcript level is not observed, 
suggesting distinct fidelity of the replication and transcription machinery. 
This study urges more attention on the most basic evolutionary processes of even 
the best-known human pathogens and deepens the understanding of their genome 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac081
PMCID: PMC9040049
PMID: 35446958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


579. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac079. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac079.

Phylogenomic Analyses of Alismatales Shed Light into Adaptations to Aquatic 
Environments.

Chen LY(1)(2), Lu B(1)(3), Morales-Briones DF(4)(5), Moody ML(6), Liu F(1), Hu 
GW(1), Huang CH(7), Chen JM(1), Wang QF(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Germplasm Enhancement and Specialty Agriculture, 
Wuhan Botanical Garden/Core Botanical Garden, Sino-Africa Joint Research Center, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430074, China.
(2)Department of Resources Science of Traditional Chinese Medicines, School of 
Traditional Chinese Pharmacy, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 211198, 
China.
(3)College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100049, China.
(4)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of Minnesota, 140 
Gortner Laboratory, 1479 Gortner Avenue, Saint Paul, MN 55108, USA.
(5)Systematics, Biodiversity and Evolution of Plants, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Menzinger Str. 67, 80638 Munich, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Texas at El Paso, 500 West 
University Ave, El Paso, TX 79968, USA.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Ministry of Education Key 
Laboratory of Biodiversity Sciences and Ecological Engineering, Institute of 
Plant Biology, Institute of Biodiversity Sciences, School of Life Sciences, 
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.

Land plants first evolved from freshwater algae, and flowering plants returned 
to water as early as the Cretaceous and multiple times subsequently. Alismatales 
is the largest clade of aquatic angiosperms including all marine angiosperms, as 
well as terrestrial plants. We used Alismatales to explore plant adaptations to 
aquatic environments by analyzing a data set that included 95 samples (89 
Alismatales species) covering four genomes and 91 transcriptomes (59 generated 
in this study). To provide a basis for investigating adaptations, we assessed 
phylogenetic conflict and whole-genome duplication (WGD) events in Alismatales. 
We recovered a relationship for the three main clades in Alismatales as 
(Tofieldiaceae, Araceae) + core Alismatids. We also found phylogenetic conflict 
among the three main clades that was best explained by incomplete lineage 
sorting and introgression. Overall, we identified 18 putative WGD events across 
Alismatales. One of them occurred at the most recent common ancestor of core 
Alismatids, and three occurred at seagrass lineages. We also found that lineage 
and life-form were both important for different evolutionary patterns for the 
genes related to freshwater and marine adaptation. For example, several light- 
or ethylene-related genes were lost in the seagrass Zosteraceae, but are present 
in other seagrasses and freshwater species. Stomata-related genes were lost in 
both submersed freshwater species and seagrasses. Nicotianamine synthase genes, 
which are important in iron intake, expanded in both submersed freshwater 
species and seagrasses. Our results advance the understanding of the adaptation 
to aquatic environments and WGDs using phylogenomics.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac079
PMCID: PMC9070837
PMID: 35438770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


580. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac052. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac052.

Geography-Dependent Horizontal Gene Transfer from Vertebrate Predators to Their 
Prey.

Kambayashi C(1), Kakehashi R(1), Sato Y(2), Mizuno H(3), Tanabe H(4), 
Rakotoarison A(5), Künzel S(6), Furuno N(2), Ohshima K(1), Kumazawa Y(7), Nagy 
ZT(8), Mori A(9), Allison A(10), Donnellan SC(11), Ota H(12), Hoso M(13), 
Yanagida T(14), Sato H(14), Vences M(15), Kurabayashi A(1)(2)(16).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Bio-Science, Nagahama Institute of Bio-Science and Technology, 
Shiga, Japan.
(2)Amphibian Research Center, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Independent Researcher, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)School of Advanced Sciences, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, 
SOKENDAI, Kanagawa, Japan.
(5)Faculté des Sciences, Université d'Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar.
(6)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(7)Graduate School of Science, Nagoya City University, Aichi, Japan.
(8)Independent Researcher, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(10)Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, Honolulu, HI, USA.
(11)South Australian Museum, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(12)Institute of Natural and Environmental Sciences, University of Hyogo, and 
Museum of Nature and Human Activities, Hyogo, Japan.
(13)Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Joint Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, 
Japan.
(15)Zoological Institute, Braunschweig University of Technology, Braunschweig, 
Germany.
(16)Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, North-West University, 
Potchefstroom, South Africa.

Horizontal transfer (HT) of genes between multicellular animals, once thought to 
be extremely rare, is being more commonly detected, but its global geographic 
trend and transfer mechanism have not been investigated. We discovered a unique 
HT pattern of Bovine-B (BovB) LINE retrotransposons in vertebrates, with a 
bizarre transfer direction from predators (snakes) to their prey (frogs). At 
least 54 instances of BovB HT were detected, which we estimate to have occurred 
across time between 85 and 1.3 Ma. Using comprehensive transcontinental 
sampling, our study demonstrates that BovB HT is highly prevalent in one 
geographical region, Madagascar, suggesting important regional differences in 
the occurrence of HTs. We discovered parasite vectors that may plausibly 
transmit BovB and found that the proportion of BovB-positive parasites is also 
high in Madagascar where BovB thus might be physically transported by parasites 
to diverse vertebrates, potentially including humans. Remarkably, in two frog 
lineages, BovB HT occurred after migration from a non-HT area (Africa) to the HT 
hotspot (Madagascar). These results provide a novel perspective on how the 
prevalence of parasites influences the occurrence of HT in a region, similar to 
pathogens and their vectors in some endemic diseases.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac052
PMCID: PMC9007160
PMID: 35417559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


581. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):msac083. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac083.

Estimation of Cross-Species Introgression Rates Using Genomic Data Despite Model 
Unidentifiability.

Yang Z(1), Flouri T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Full-likelihood implementations of the multispecies coalescent with 
introgression (MSci) model treat genealogical fluctuations across the genome as 
a major source of information to infer the history of species divergence and 
gene flow using multilocus sequence data. However, MSci models are known to have 
unidentifiability issues, whereby different models or parameters make the same 
predictions about the data and cannot be distinguished by the data. Previous 
studies of unidentifiability have focused on heuristic methods based on gene 
trees and do not make an efficient use of the information in the data. Here we 
study the unidentifiability of MSci models under the full-likelihood methods. We 
characterize the unidentifiability of the bidirectional introgression (BDI) 
model, which assumes that gene flow occurs in both directions. We derive simple 
rules for arbitrary BDI models, which create unidentifiability of the 
label-switching type. In general, an MSci model with k BDI events has 2k 
unidentifiable modes or towers in the posterior, with each BDI event between 
sister species creating within-model parameter unidentifiability and each BDI 
event between nonsister species creating between-model unidentifiability. We 
develop novel algorithms for processing Markov chain Monte Carlo samples to 
remove label-switching problems and implement them in the bpp program. We 
analyze real and synthetic data to illustrate the utility of the BDI models and 
the new algorithms. We discuss the unidentifiability of heuristic methods and 
provide guidelines for the use of MSci models to infer gene flow using genomic 
data.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac083
PMCID: PMC9087891
PMID: 35417543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


582. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac082. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac082.

Venom Gene Sequence Diversity and Expression Jointly Shape Diet Adaptation in 
Pitvipers.

Mason AJ(1), Holding ML(2), Rautsaw RM(3), Rokyta DR(4), Parkinson CL(3)(5), 
Gibbs HL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Organismal Biology, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, 
USA.
(5)Department of Forestry and Environmental Conservation, Clemson University, 
Clemson, SC, USA.

Understanding the joint roles of protein sequence variation and differential 
expression during adaptive evolution is a fundamental, yet largely unrealized 
goal of evolutionary biology. Here, we use phylogenetic path analysis to analyze 
a comprehensive venom-gland transcriptome dataset spanning three genera of 
pitvipers to identify the functional genetic basis of a key adaptation (venom 
complexity) linked to diet breadth (DB). The analysis of gene-family-specific 
patterns reveals that, for genes encoding two of the most important venom 
proteins (snake venom metalloproteases and snake venom serine proteases), there 
are direct, positive relationships between sequence diversity (SD), expression 
diversity (ED), and increased DB. Further analysis of gene-family 
diversification for these proteins showed no constraint on how individual 
lineages achieved toxin gene SD in terms of the patterns of paralog 
diversification. In contrast, another major venom protein family (PLA2s) showed 
no relationship between venom molecular diversity and DB. Additional analyses 
suggest that other molecular mechanisms-such as higher absolute levels of 
expression-are responsible for diet adaptation involving these venom proteins. 
Broadly, our findings argue that functional diversity generated through sequence 
and expression variations jointly determine adaptation in the key components of 
pitviper venoms, which mediate complex molecular interactions between the snakes 
and their prey.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac082
PMCID: PMC9040050
PMID: 35413123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


583. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac077. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac077.

Different Genes are Recruited During Convergent Evolution of Pregnancy and the 
Placenta.

Foster CSP(1)(2), Van Dyke JU(3), Thompson MB(1), Smith NMA(4), Simpfendorfer 
CA(5), Murphy CR(6), Whittington CM(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(2)School of Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)School of Molecular Sciences, La Trobe University, Albury-Wodonga Campus, 
VIC, Australia.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.
(5)College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, 
Queensland, Australia.
(6)School of Medical Sciences and The Bosch Institute, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The repeated evolution of the same traits in distantly related groups 
(convergent evolution) raises a key question in evolutionary biology: do the 
same genes underpin convergent phenotypes? Here, we explore one such trait, 
viviparity (live birth), which, qualitative studies suggest, may indeed have 
evolved via genetic convergence. There are >150 independent origins of live 
birth in vertebrates, providing a uniquely powerful system to test the 
mechanisms underpinning convergence in morphology, physiology, and/or gene 
recruitment during pregnancy. We compared transcriptomic data from eight 
vertebrates (lizards, mammals, sharks) that gestate embryos within the uterus. 
Since many previous studies detected qualitative similarities in gene use during 
independent origins of pregnancy, we expected to find significant overlap in 
gene use in viviparous taxa. However, we found no more overlap in uterine gene 
expression associated with viviparity than we would expect by chance alone. Each 
viviparous lineage exhibits the same core set of uterine physiological 
functions. Yet, contrary to prevailing assumptions about this trait, we find 
that none of the same genes are differentially expressed in all viviparous 
lineages, or even in all viviparous amniote lineages. Therefore, across 
distantly related vertebrates, different genes have been recruited to support 
the morphological and physiological changes required for successful pregnancy. 
We conclude that redundancies in gene function have enabled the repeated 
evolution of viviparity through recruitment of different genes from genomic 
"toolboxes", which are uniquely constrained by the ancestries of each lineage.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac077
PMCID: PMC9048886
PMID: 35388432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


584. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac078. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac078.

Transposon Insertion Drove the Loss of Natural Seed Shattering during Foxtail 
Millet Domestication.

Liu H(1), Fang X(1), Zhou L(1), Li Y(1), Zhu C(1), Liu J(1), Song Y(1), Jian 
X(1), Xu M(1), Dong L(1), Lin Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)National Maize Improvement Center, Department of Crop Genetics and Breeding, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Sanya Institute of China Agricultural University, Sanya, Hainan, China.

Loss of seed shattering was a key step during cereal domestication, and it 
greatly facilitated seed harvest of the staple cereal foxtail millet (Setaria 
italica) because the cereal has very small seeds. However, the genetic basis for 
this loss has been largely unknown. Here, we combined comparative and 
association mapping to identify an 855-bp Harbinger transposable element 
insertion in the second exon of the foxtail millet gene shattering1 (sh1) that 
was responsible for the loss of seed shattering. The sh1 gene encodes zinc 
finger and YABBY domains. The insert prevents transcription of the second exon, 
causing partial loss of the zinc finger domain and then loss of natural seed 
shattering. Specifically, sh1 functions as a transcription repressor and 
represses the transcription of genes associated with lignin synthesis in the 
abscission zone, including CAD2. The diversity of sh1 is highly reduced in 
foxtail millet, consistent with either a severe domestication bottleneck or a 
selective sweep. Phylogenetic analysis of sh1 further revealed a single origin 
of foxtail millet in China. Our results support the theories that transposons 
were the most active factors in genome evolution driving loss of natural seed 
shattering during foxtail millet domestication and that sh1 underwent parallel 
selection during domestication across different cereal species.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac078
PMCID: PMC9167939
PMID: 35388422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


585. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac073. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac073.

Challenging Ancient DNA Results About Putative HLA Protection or Susceptibility 
to Yersinia pestis.

Di D(1), Simon Thomas J(1), Currat M(1)(2), Nunes JM(1)(2), Sanchez-Mazas 
A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Anthropology, Genetics and Peopling History, Department of 
Genetics and Evolution-Anthropology Unit, University of Geneva, Quai 
Ernest-Ansermet 30, CH-1205 Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (IGE3), University of Geneva 
Medical Centre (CMU), 1 rue Michel-Servet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

In a recent article, Immel et al. (Immel A, Key FM, Szolek A, Barquera R, 
Robinson MK, Harrison GF, Palmer WH, Spyrou MA, Susat J, Krause-Kyora B, et al. 
2021. Analysis of genomic DNA from medieval plague victims suggests long-term 
effect of Yersinia pestis on human immunity genes. Mol Biol Evol. 38:4059-4076) 
extracted DNA from 36 individuals dead from plague in Ellwangen, Southern 
Germany, during the 16th century. By comparing their human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) genotypes with those of 50 present-day Ellwangen inhabitants, the authors 
reported a significant decrease of HLA-B*51:01 and HLA-C*06:02 and a significant 
increase of HLA-DRB1*13:01/13:02 frequencies from ancient to modern populations. 
After comparing these frequencies with a larger sample of 8,862 modern Germans 
and performing simulations of natural selection, they concluded that these 
changes had been driven by natural selection. In an attempt to provide more 
evidence on such stimulating results, we explored the HLA frequency patterns 
over all of Europe, we predicted binding affinities of HLA-B/C/DRB1 alleles to 
106,515 Yersinia pestis-derived peptides, and we performed forward simulations 
of HLA genetic profiles under neutrality. Our analyses do not sustain the 
conclusions of HLA protection or susceptibility to plague based on ancient DNA.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac073
PMCID: PMC9021733
PMID: 35383854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


586. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac075. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac075.

Reconstructing the Origins of the Somatostatin and Allatostatin-C Signaling 
Systems Using the Accelerated Evolution of Biodiverse Cone Snail Toxins.

Koch TL(1), Ramiro IBL(1), Flórez Salcedo P(2), Engholm E(1)(3), Jensen KJ(3), 
Chase K(4), Olivera BM(4), Bjørn-Yoshimoto WE(1), Safavi-Hemami H(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen-N 
2200, Denmark.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, 
USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg 1871, 
Denmark.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, 
USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, 
USA.

Somatostatin and its related peptides (SSRPs) form an important family of 
hormones with diverse physiological roles. The ubiquitous presence of SSRPs in 
vertebrates and several invertebrate deuterostomes suggests an ancient origin of 
the SSRP signaling system. However, the existence of SSRP genes outside of 
deuterostomes has not been established, and the evolutionary history of this 
signaling system remains poorly understood. Our recent discovery of SSRP-like 
toxins (consomatins) in venomous marine cone snails (Conus) suggested the 
presence of a related signaling system in mollusks and potentially other 
protostomes. Here, we identify the molluscan SSRP-like signaling gene that gave 
rise to the consomatin family. Following recruitment into venom, consomatin 
genes experienced strong positive selection and repeated gene duplications 
resulting in the formation of a hyperdiverse family of venom peptides. 
Intriguingly, the largest number of consomatins was found in worm-hunting 
species (>400 sequences), indicating a homologous system in annelids, another 
large protostome phylum. Consistent with this, comprehensive sequence mining 
enabled the identification of SSRP-like sequences (and their corresponding 
orphan receptor) in annelids and several other protostome phyla. These results 
established the existence of SSRP-like peptides in many major branches of 
bilaterians and challenge the prevailing hypothesis that deuterostome SSRPs and 
protostome allatostatin-C are orthologous peptide families. Finally, having a 
large set of predator-prey SSRP sequences available, we show that although the 
cone snail's signaling SSRP-like genes are under purifying selection, the venom 
consomatin genes experience rapid directional selection to target receptors in a 
changing mix of prey.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac075
PMCID: PMC9048919
PMID: 35383850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


587. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac074. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac074.

Global Patterns of Subgenome Evolution in Organelle-Targeted Genes of Six 
Allotetraploid Angiosperms.

Sharbrough J(1)(2), Conover JL(3), Fernandes Gyorfy M(1), Grover CE(3), Miller 
ER(3), Wendel JF(3), Sloan DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, 
Socorro, NM, USA.
(3)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA, USA.

Whole-genome duplications (WGDs) are a prominent process of diversification in 
eukaryotes. The genetic and evolutionary forces that WGD imposes on cytoplasmic 
genomes are not well understood, despite the central role that cytonuclear 
interactions play in eukaryotic function and fitness. Cellular respiration and 
photosynthesis depend on successful interaction between the 3,000+ 
nuclear-encoded proteins destined for the mitochondria or plastids and the gene 
products of cytoplasmic genomes in multi-subunit complexes such as OXPHOS, 
organellar ribosomes, Photosystems I and II, and Rubisco. Allopolyploids are 
thus faced with the critical task of coordinating interactions between the 
nuclear and cytoplasmic genes that were inherited from different species. 
Because the cytoplasmic genomes share a more recent history of common descent 
with the maternal nuclear subgenome than the paternal subgenome, evolutionary 
"mismatches" between the paternal subgenome and the cytoplasmic genomes in 
allopolyploids might lead to the accelerated rates of evolution in the paternal 
homoeologs of allopolyploids, either through relaxed purifying selection or 
strong directional selection to rectify these mismatches. We report evidence 
from six independently formed allotetraploids that the subgenomes exhibit 
unequal rates of protein-sequence evolution, but we found no evidence that 
cytonuclear incompatibilities result in altered evolutionary trajectories of the 
paternal homoeologs of organelle-targeted genes. The analyses of gene content 
revealed mixed evidence for whether the organelle-targeted genes are lost more 
rapidly than the non-organelle-targeted genes. Together, these global analyses 
provide insights into the complex evolutionary dynamics of allopolyploids, 
showing that the allopolyploid subgenomes have separate evolutionary 
trajectories despite sharing the same nucleus, generation time, and ecological 
context.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac074
PMCID: PMC9040051
PMID: 35383845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


588. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac071. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac071.

Detection of F1 Hybrids from Single-genome Data Reveals Frequent Hybridization 
in Hymenoptera and Particularly Ants.

Weyna A(1), Bourouina L(1), Galtier N(1), Romiguier J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution (UMR 5554), University of Montpellier, 
CNRS Montpellier, France.

Hybridization occupies a central role in many fundamental evolutionary 
processes, such as speciation or adaptation. Yet, despite its pivotal importance 
in evolution, little is known about the actual prevalence and distribution of 
current hybridization across the tree of life. Here we develop and implement a 
new statistical method enabling the detection of F1 hybrids from 
single-individual genome sequencing data. Using simulations and sequencing data 
from known hybrid systems, we first demonstrate the specificity of the method, 
and identify its statistical limits. Next, we showcase the method by applying it 
to available sequencing data from more than 1,500 species of Arthropods, 
including Hymenoptera, Hemiptera, Coleoptera, Diptera, and Archnida. Among these 
taxa, we find Hymenoptera, and especially ants, to display the highest number of 
candidate F1 hybrids, suggesting higher rates of recent hybridization between 
previously isolated gene pools in these groups. The prevalence of F1 hybrids was 
heterogeneously distributed across ants, with taxa including many candidates 
tending to harbor specific ecological and life-history traits. This work shows 
how large-scale genomic comparative studies of recent hybridization can be 
implemented, uncovering the determinants of first-generation hybridization 
across whole taxa.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac071
PMCID: PMC9021736
PMID: 35363317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


589. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac064. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac064.

Species Persistence with Hybridization in Toad-Headed Lizards Driven by 
Divergent Selection and Low Recombination.

Gao W(1), Yu CX(1)(2), Zhou WW(1), Zhang BL(1), Chambers EA(3)(4), Dahn HA(5), 
Jin JQ(1), Murphy RW(1)(5)(6), Zhang YP(1)(7), Che J(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution & Yunnan Key 
Laboratory of Biodiversity and Ecological Security of Gaoligong Mountain, 
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming, China.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology and Biodiversity Center, University of 
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, University of 
California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(6)Centre for Biodiversity and Conservation Biology, Royal Ontario Museum, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Speciation plays a central role in evolutionary studies, and particularly how 
reproductive isolation (RI) evolves. The origins and persistence of RI are 
distinct processes that require separate evaluations. Treating them separately 
clarifies the drivers of speciation and then it is possible to link the 
processes to understand large-scale patterns of diversity. Recent genomic 
studies have focused predominantly on how species or RI originate. However, we 
know little about how species persist in face of gene flow. Here, we evaluate a 
contact zone of two closely related toad-headed lizards (Phrynocephalus) using a 
chromosome-level genome assembly and population genomics. To some extent, recent 
asymmetric introgression from Phrynocephalus putjatai to P. vlangalii reduces 
their genomic differences. However, their highly divergent regions (HDRs) have 
heterogeneous distributions across the genomes. Functional gene annotation 
indicates that many genes within HDRs are involved in reproduction and RI. 
Compared with allopatric populations, contact areas exhibit recent divergent 
selection on the HDRs and a lower population recombination rate. Taken together, 
this implies that divergent selection and low genetic recombination help 
maintain RI. This study provides insights into the genomic mechanisms that drive 
RI and two species persistence in the face of gene flow during the late stage of 
speciation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac064
PMCID: PMC9007161
PMID: 35356979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


590. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac070. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac070.

Multiple Profile Models Extract Features from Protein Sequence Data and Resolve 
Functional Diversity of Very Different Protein Families.

Vicedomini R(1)(2), Bouly JP(1)(3), Laine E(1), Falciatore A(1)(3), Carbone 
A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)CNRS, IBPS, Laboratoire de Biologie Computationnelle et Quantitative - UMR 
7238, Sorbonne Université, 4 place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France.
(2)Institut des Sciences du Calcul et des Données, Sorbonne Université, Paris, 
France.
(3)CNRS, Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, Laboratory of Chloroplast 
Biology and Light Sensing in Microalgae - UMR7141, Sorbonne Université, Paris, 
France.
(4)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris 75005, France.

Functional classification of proteins from sequences alone has become a critical 
bottleneck in understanding the myriad of protein sequences that accumulate in 
our databases. The great diversity of homologous sequences hides, in many cases, 
a variety of functional activities that cannot be anticipated. Their 
identification appears critical for a fundamental understanding of the evolution 
of living organisms and for biotechnological applications. ProfileView is a 
sequence-based computational method, designed to functionally classify sets of 
homologous sequences. It relies on two main ideas: the use of multiple profile 
models whose construction explores evolutionary information in available 
databases, and a novel definition of a representation space in which to analyze 
sequences with multiple profile models combined together. ProfileView classifies 
protein families by enriching known functional groups with new sequences and 
discovering new groups and subgroups. We validate ProfileView on seven classes 
of widespread proteins involved in the interaction with nucleic acids, amino 
acids and small molecules, and in a large variety of functions and enzymatic 
reactions. ProfileView agrees with the large set of functional data collected 
for these proteins from the literature regarding the organization into 
functional subgroups and residues that characterize the functions. In addition, 
ProfileView resolves undefined functional classifications and extracts the 
molecular determinants underlying protein functional diversity, showing its 
potential to select sequences towards accurate experimental design and discovery 
of novel biological functions. On protein families with complex domain 
architecture, ProfileView functional classification reconciles domain 
combinations, unlike phylogenetic reconstruction. ProfileView proves to 
outperform the functional classification approach PANTHER, the two k-mer-based 
methods CUPP and eCAMI and a neural network approach based on Restricted 
Boltzmann Machines. It overcomes time complexity limitations of the latter.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac070
PMCID: PMC9016551
PMID: 35353898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


591. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac063. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac063.

The Structural Determinants of Intra-Protein Compensatory Substitutions.

Chaurasia S(1), Dutheil JY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)RG Molecular Systems Evolution, Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max 
Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, August-Thienemann-Straße 2, 24306 
Plön, Germany.
(2)Institute of Evolution Sciences of Montpellier (ISEM), CNRS, University of 
Montpellier, IRD, EPHE, 34095 Montpellier, France.

Compensatory substitutions happen when one mutation is advantageously selected 
because it restores the loss of fitness induced by a previous deleterious 
mutation. How frequent such mutations occur in evolution and what is the 
structural and functional context permitting their emergence remain open 
questions. We built an atlas of intra-protein compensatory substitutions using a 
phylogenetic approach and a dataset of 1,630 bacterial protein families for 
which high-quality sequence alignments and experimentally derived protein 
structures were available. We identified more than 51,000 positions coevolving 
by the mean of predicted compensatory mutations. Using the evolutionary and 
structural properties of the analyzed positions, we demonstrate that 
compensatory mutations are scarce (typically only a few in the protein history) 
but widespread (the majority of proteins experienced at least one). Typical 
coevolving residues are evolving slowly, are located in the protein core outside 
secondary structure motifs, and are more often in contact than expected by 
chance, even after accounting for their evolutionary rate and solvent exposure. 
An exception to this general scheme is residues coevolving for charge 
compensation, which are evolving faster than noncoevolving sites, in 
contradiction with predictions from simple coevolutionary models, but similar to 
stem pairs in RNA. While sites with a significant pattern of coevolution by 
compensatory mutations are rare, the comparative analysis of hundreds of 
structures ultimately permits a better understanding of the link between the 
three-dimensional structure of a protein and its fitness landscape.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac063
PMCID: PMC9004419
PMID: 35349721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


592. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac065. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac065.

An Enigmatic Stramenopile Sheds Light on Early Evolution in Ochrophyta Plastid 
Organellogenesis.

Azuma T(1), Pánek T(2)(3), Tice AK(3), Kayama M(1), Kobayashi M(4), Miyashita 
H(1), Suzaki T(4), Yabuki A(5), Brown MW(3), Kamikawa R(6).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, Kyoto University, Yoshida 
nihonmatsu cho, Sakyo ku, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi 
State, MS, USA.
(4)Graduate School of Science, Kobe University, Hyogo, Japan.
(5)Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology, Yokosuka, Japan.
(6)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa oiwake cho, 
Sakyo ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Ochrophyta is an algal group belonging to the Stramenopiles and comprises 
diverse lineages of algae which contribute significantly to the oceanic 
ecosystems as primary producers. However, early evolution of the plastid 
organelle in Ochrophyta is not fully understood. In this study, we provide a 
well-supported tree of the Stramenopiles inferred by the large-scale 
phylogenomic analysis that unveils the eukaryvorous (nonphotosynthetic) protist 
Actinophrys sol (Actinophryidae) is closely related to Ochrophyta. We used 
genomic and transcriptomic data generated from A. sol to detect molecular traits 
of its plastid and we found no evidence of plastid genome and plastid-mediated 
biosynthesis, consistent with previous ultrastructural studies that did not 
identify any plastids in Actinophryidae. Moreover, our phylogenetic analyses of 
particular biosynthetic pathways provide no evidence of a current and past 
plastid in A. sol. However, we found more than a dozen organellar aminoacyl-tRNA 
synthases (aaRSs) that are of algal origin. Close relationships between aaRS 
from A. sol and their ochrophyte homologs document gene transfer of algal genes 
that happened before the divergence of Actinophryidae and Ochrophyta lineages. 
We further showed experimentally that organellar aaRSs of A. sol are targeted 
exclusively to mitochondria, although organellar aaRSs in Ochrophyta are dually 
targeted to mitochondria and plastids. Together, our findings suggested that the 
last common ancestor of Actinophryidae and Ochrophyta had not yet completed the 
establishment of host-plastid partnership as seen in the current Ochrophyta 
species, but acquired at least certain nuclear-encoded genes for the plastid 
functions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac065
PMCID: PMC9004409
PMID: 35348760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


593. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac067. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac067.

Multiple Mechanisms of Photoreceptor Spectral Tuning in Heliconius Butterflies.

McCulloch KJ(1)(2), Macias-Muñoz A(1)(3)(4), Mortazavi A(4), Briscoe AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior, University of Minnesota, St 
Paul, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Biology, University of 
California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.

The evolution of color vision is often studied through the lens of receptor gain 
relative to an ancestor with fewer spectral classes of photoreceptor. For 
instance, in Heliconius butterflies, a genus-specific UVRh opsin duplication led 
to the evolution of UV color discrimination in Heliconius erato females, a rare 
trait among butterflies. However, color vision evolution is not well understood 
in the context of loss. In Heliconius melpomene and Heliconius ismenius 
lineages, the UV2 receptor subtype has been lost, which limits female color 
vision in shorter wavelengths. Here, we compare the visual systems of 
butterflies that have either retained or lost the UV2 photoreceptor using 
intracellular recordings, ATAC-seq, and antibody staining. We identify several 
ways these butterflies modulate their color vision. In H. melpomene, chromatin 
reorganization has downregulated an otherwise intact UVRh2 gene, whereas in H. 
ismenius, pseudogenization has led to the truncation of UVRh2. In species that 
lack the UV2 receptor, the peak sensitivity of the remaining UV1 photoreceptor 
cell is shifted to longer wavelengths. Across Heliconius, we identify the 
widespread use of filtering pigments and co-expression of two opsins in the same 
photoreceptor cells. Multiple mechanisms of spectral tuning, including the 
molecular evolution of blue opsins, have led to the divergence of receptor 
sensitivities between species. The diversity of photoreceptor and ommatidial 
subtypes between species suggests that Heliconius visual systems are under 
varying selection pressures for color discrimination. Modulating the wavelengths 
of peak sensitivities of both the blue- and remaining UV-sensitive photoreceptor 
cells suggests that Heliconius species may have compensated for UV receptor 
loss.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac067
PMCID: PMC9048915
PMID: 35348742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


594. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac069. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac069.

Positive Selection during Niche Adaptation Results in Large-Scale and 
Irreversible Rearrangement of Chromosomal Gene Order in Bacteria.

Cao S(1), Brandis G(2), Huseby DL(1), Hughes D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

Analysis of bacterial genomes shows that, whereas diverse species share many 
genes in common, their linear order on the chromosome is often not conserved. 
Whereas rearrangements in gene order could occur by genetic drift, an 
alternative hypothesis is rearrangement driven by positive selection during 
niche adaptation (SNAP). Here, we provide the first experimental support for the 
SNAP hypothesis. We evolved Salmonella to adapt to growth on malate as the sole 
carbon source and followed the evolutionary trajectories. The initial adaptation 
to growth in the new environment involved the duplication of 1.66 Mb, 
corresponding to one-third of the Salmonella chromosome. This duplication is 
selected to increase the copy number of a single gene, dctA, involved in the 
uptake of malate. Continuing selection led to the rapid loss or mutation of 
duplicate genes from either copy of the duplicated region. After 2000 
generations, only 31% of the originally duplicated genes remained intact and the 
gene order within the Salmonella chromosome has been significantly and 
irreversibly altered. These results experientially validate predictions made by 
the SNAP hypothesis and show that SNAP can be a strong driving force for 
rearrangements in chromosomal gene order.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac069
PMCID: PMC9016547
PMID: 35348727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


595. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac068. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac068.

Paleozoic Protein Fossils Illuminate the Evolution of Vertebrate Genomes and 
Transposable Elements.

Frith MC(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Artificial Intelligence Research Center, AIST, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Computational Bio Big-Data Open Innovation Laboratory, AIST, Tokyo, Japan.

Genomes hold a treasure trove of protein fossils: Fragments of formerly 
protein-coding DNA, which mainly come from transposable elements (TEs) or host 
genes. These fossils reveal ancient evolution of TEs and genomes, and many 
fossils have been exapted to perform diverse functions important for the host's 
fitness. However, old and highly degraded fossils are hard to identify, standard 
methods (e.g. BLAST) are not optimized for this task, and few Paleozoic protein 
fossils have been found. Here, a recently optimized method is used to find 
protein fossils in vertebrate genomes. It finds Paleozoic fossils predating the 
amphibian/amniote divergence from most major TE categories, including 
virus-related Polinton and Gypsy elements. It finds 10 fossils in the human 
genome (eight from TEs and two from host genes) that predate the last common 
ancestor of all jawed vertebrates, probably from the Ordovician period. It also 
finds types of transposon and retrotransposon not found in human before. These 
fossils have extreme sequence conservation, indicating exaptation: some have 
evidence of gene-regulatory function, and they tend to lie nearest to 
developmental genes. Some ancient fossils suggest "genome tectonics," where two 
fragments of one TE have drifted apart by up to megabases, possibly explaining 
gene deserts and large introns. This paints a picture of great TE diversity in 
our aquatic ancestors, with patchy TE inheritance by later vertebrates, 
producing new genes and regulatory elements on the way. Host-gene fossils too 
have contributed anciently conserved DNA segments. This paves the way to further 
studies of ancient protein fossils.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac068
PMCID: PMC9004415
PMID: 35348724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


596. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac066. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac066.

De Novo Assembly of 20 Chicken Genomes Reveals the Undetectable Phenomenon for 
Thousands of Core Genes on Microchromosomes and Subtelomeric Regions.

Li M(1), Sun C(2), Xu N(1), Bian P(1), Tian X(1), Wang X(1), Wang Y(3)(4), Jia 
X(5)(6), Heller R(7), Wang M(8)(9), Wang F(1), Dai X(1), Luo R(1), Guo Y(1), 
Wang X(1), Yang P(1), Hu D(1), Liu Z(1), Fu W(1), Zhang S(1), Li X(2), Wen C(2), 
Lan F(2), Siddiki AZ(10), Suwannapoom C(11), Zhao X(12), Nie Q(13), Hu X(3), 
Jiang Y(1)(14), Yang N(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi 
Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling 712100, China.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding and Key Laboratory of 
Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Affairs, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(4)National Research Facility for Phenotypic and Genotypic Analysis of Model 
Animals (Beijing), China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(5)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
(6)School of Life Science and Engineering, Foshan University, Foshan 528225, 
China.
(7)Section for Computational and RNA Biology, Department of Biology, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen N 2200, Denmark.
(8)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa 
Cruz, CA 95064, USA.
(9)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California 
Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology and Parasitology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Chittagong Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Chittagong 4202, 
Bangladesh.
(11)School of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Phayao, Phayao, 
Thailand.
(12)Department of Animal Science, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(13)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal 
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, 
China.
(14)Center for Functional Genomics, Institute of Future Agriculture, Northwest 
A&F University, China.

The gene numbers and evolutionary rates of birds were assumed to be much lower 
than those of mammals, which is in sharp contrast to the huge species number and 
morphological diversity of birds. It is, therefore, necessary to construct a 
complete avian genome and analyze its evolution. We constructed a chicken 
pan-genome from 20 de novo assembled genomes with high sequencing depth, and 
identified 1,335 protein-coding genes and 3,011 long noncoding RNAs not found in 
GRCg6a. The majority of these novel genes were detected across most individuals 
of the examined transcriptomes but were seldomly measured in each of the DNA 
sequencing data regardless of Illumina or PacBio technology. Furthermore, 
different from previous pan-genome models, most of these novel genes were 
overrepresented on chromosomal subtelomeric regions and microchromosomes, 
surrounded by extremely high proportions of tandem repeats, which strongly 
blocks DNA sequencing. These hidden genes were proved to be shared by all 
chicken genomes, included many housekeeping genes, and enriched in immune 
pathways. Comparative genomics revealed the novel genes had 3-fold elevated 
substitution rates than known ones, updating the knowledge about evolutionary 
rates in birds. Our study provides a framework for constructing a better chicken 
genome, which will contribute toward the understanding of avian evolution and 
the improvement of poultry breeding.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac066
PMCID: PMC9021737
PMID: 35325213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


597. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac061. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac061.

Selection Analysis Identifies Clusters of Unusual Mutational Changes in Omicron 
Lineage BA.1 That Likely Impact Spike Function.

Martin DP(1), Lytras S(2), Lucaci AG(3), Maier W(4), Grüning B(4), Shank SD(3), 
Weaver S(3), MacLean OA(2), Orton RJ(2), Lemey P(5), Boni MF(6), Tegally H(7), 
Harkins GW(8), Scheepers C(9)(10), Bhiman JN(9)(10), Everatt J(9), Amoako DG(9), 
San JE(7), Giandhari J(7), Sigal A(11); NGS-SA; Williamson C(12)(13)(14), Hsiao 
NY(13), von Gottberg A(9)(15), De Klerk A(1), Shafer RW(16), Robertson DL(2), 
Wilkinson RJ(14)(17)(18), Sewell BT(19), Lessells R(7), Nekrutenko A(20), 
Greaney AJ(21)(22), Starr TN(21)(23), Bloom JD(21)(23), Murrell B(24), Wilkinson 
E(7)(25), Gupta RK(11)(26), de Oliveira T(7)(25), Kosakovsky Pond SL(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine, Division of 
Computational Biology, Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, University 
of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Department of Biology, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Bioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany, usegalaxy.eu.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, Department of Biology, Pennsylvania 
State University, University Park, PA, USA.
(7)KwaZulu-Natal Research Innovation and Sequencing Platform (KRISP), School of 
Laboratory Medicine & Medical Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, 
South Africa.
(8)South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western 
Cape, Cape Town, South Africa.
(9)National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) of the National Health 
Laboratory Service (NHLS), Johannesburg, South Africa.
(10)SA MRC Antibody Immunity Research Unit, School of Pathology, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(11)Africa Health Research Institute, Durban, South Africa.
(12)Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, Department of 
Pathology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(13)Division of Medical Virology, University of Cape Town and National Health 
Laboratory Service, Cape Town, South Africa.
(14)Wellcome Center for Infectious Diseases Research in Africa, Institute of 
Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine and Department of Medicine, University 
of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(15)School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(16)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(17)Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(18)Department of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(19)Structural Biology Research Unit, Department of Integrative Biomedical 
Sciences, Institute for Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(20)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, USA, usegalaxy.org.
(21)Basic Sciences Division and Computational Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(22)Department of Genome Sciences & Medical Scientist Training Program, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(23)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(24)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(25)Centre for Epidemic Response and Innovation (CERI), School of Data Science, 
Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
(26)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Diseases, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2022 Jan 18;:

Among the 30 nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions in the Omicron S-gene are 13 
that have only rarely been seen in other SARS-CoV-2 sequences. These mutations 
cluster within three functionally important regions of the S-gene at sites that 
will likely impact (1) interactions between subunits of the Spike trimer and the 
predisposition of subunits to shift from down to up configurations, (2) 
interactions of Spike with ACE2 receptors, and (3) the priming of Spike for 
membrane fusion. We show here that, based on both the rarity of these 13 
mutations in intrapatient sequencing reads and patterns of selection at the 
codon sites where the mutations occur in SARS-CoV-2 and related sarbecoviruses, 
prior to the emergence of Omicron the mutations would have been predicted to 
decrease the fitness of any virus within which they occurred. We further propose 
that the mutations in each of the three clusters therefore cooperatively 
interact to both mitigate their individual fitness costs, and, in combination 
with other mutations, adaptively alter the function of Spike. Given the evident 
epidemic growth advantages of Omicron overall previously known SARS-CoV-2 
lineages, it is crucial to determine both how such complex and highly adaptive 
mutation constellations were assembled within the Omicron S-gene, and why, 
despite unprecedented global genomic surveillance efforts, the early stages of 
this assembly process went completely undetected.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac061
PMCID: PMC9037384
PMID: 35325204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


598. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac060. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac060.

Tempo of Degeneration Across Independently Evolved Nonrecombining Regions.

Carpentier F(1)(2), Rodríguez de la Vega RC(1), Jay P(1), Duhamel M(1)(3), 
Shykoff JA(1), Perlin MH(4), Wallen RM(4), Hood ME(5), Giraud T(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Ecologie Systématique et Evolution, Bâtiment 360, CNRS, 
AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 91400 Orsay, France.
(2)Université de Lille, CNRS, UMR 8198-Evo-Eco-Paleo F-59000, Lille, France.
(3)Evolution der Pflanzen und Pilze, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Universitätsstraße 
150, 44780, Bochum, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, Program on Disease Evolution, University of 
Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, Amherst College, Amherst, MA, USA.

Recombination is beneficial over the long term, allowing more effective 
selection. Despite long-term advantages of recombination, local recombination 
suppression can evolve and lead to genomic degeneration, in particular on sex 
chromosomes. Here, we investigated the tempo of degeneration in nonrecombining 
regions, that is, the function curve for the accumulation of deleterious 
mutations over time, leveraging on 22 independent events of recombination 
suppression identified on mating-type chromosomes of anther-smut fungi, 
including newly identified ones. Using previously available and newly generated 
high-quality genome assemblies of alternative mating types of 13 Microbotryum 
species, we estimated degeneration levels in terms of accumulation of nonoptimal 
codons and nonsynonymous substitutions in nonrecombining regions. We found a 
reduced frequency of optimal codons in the nonrecombining regions compared with 
autosomes, that was not due to less frequent GC-biased gene conversion or lower 
ancestral expression levels compared with recombining regions. The frequency of 
optimal codons rapidly decreased following recombination suppression and reached 
an asymptote after ca. 3 Ma. The strength of purifying selection remained 
virtually constant at dN/dS = 0.55, that is, at an intermediate level between 
purifying selection and neutral evolution. Accordingly, nonsynonymous 
differences between mating-type chromosomes increased linearly with stratum age, 
at a rate of 0.015 per My. We thus develop a method for disentangling effects of 
reduced selection efficacy from GC-biased gene conversion in the evolution of 
codon usage and we quantify the tempo of degeneration in nonrecombining regions, 
which is important for our knowledge on genomic evolution and on the maintenance 
of regions without recombination.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac060
PMCID: PMC9004411
PMID: 35325190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


599. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac059. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac059.

Genetic Diversity, Heteroplasmy, and Recombination in Mitochondrial Genomes of 
Daphnia pulex, Daphnia pulicaria, and Daphnia obtusa.

Ye Z(1), Zhao C(1), Raborn RT(1), Lin M(1), Wei W(1), Hao Y(1), Lynch M(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA.

Genetic variants of mitochondrial DNA at the individual (heteroplasmy) and 
population (polymorphism) levels provide insight into their roles in multiple 
cellular and evolutionary processes. However, owing to the paucity of 
genome-wide data at the within-individual and population levels, the broad 
patterns of these two forms of variation remain poorly understood. Here, we 
analyze 1,804 complete mitochondrial genome sequences from Daphnia pulex, 
Daphnia pulicaria, and Daphnia obtusa. Extensive heteroplasmy is observed in D. 
obtusa, where the high level of intraclonal divergence must have resulted from a 
biparental-inheritance event, and recombination in the mitochondrial genome is 
apparent, although perhaps not widespread. Global samples of D. pulex reveal 
remarkably low mitochondrial effective population sizes, <3% of those for the 
nuclear genome. In addition, levels of population diversity in mitochondrial and 
nuclear genomes are uncorrelated across populations, suggesting an idiosyncratic 
evolutionary history of mitochondria in D. pulex. These population-genetic 
features appear to be a consequence of background selection associated with 
highly deleterious mutations arising in the strongly linked mitochondrial 
genome, which is consistent with polymorphism and divergence data suggesting a 
predominance of strong purifying selection. Nonetheless, the fixation of mildly 
deleterious mutations in the mitochondrial genome also appears to be driving 
positive selection on genes encoded in the nuclear genome whose products are 
deployed in the mitochondrion.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac059
PMCID: PMC9004417
PMID: 35325186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


600. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac062. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac062.

An Extremely Streamlined Macronuclear Genome in the Free-Living Protozoan Fabrea 
salina.

Zhang B(1)(2), Hou L(1), Qi H(3), Hou L(1), Zhang T(1), Zhao F(1)(2), Miao M(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(2)Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China.
(3)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Aqua-ecology and Aquaculture, Fisheries College, 
Tianjin Agricultural University, Tianjin 300384, China.

Ciliated protists are among the oldest unicellular organisms with a 
heterotrophic lifestyle and share a common ancestor with Plantae. Unlike any 
other eukaryotes, there are two distinct nuclei in ciliates with separate 
germline and somatic cell functions. Here, we assembled a near-complete 
macronuclear genome of Fabrea salina, which belongs to one of the oldest clades 
of ciliates. Its extremely minimized genome (18.35 Mb) is the smallest among all 
free-living heterotrophic eukaryotes and exhibits typical streamlined genomic 
features, including high gene density, tiny introns, and shrinkage of gene 
paralogs. Gene families involved in hypersaline stress resistance, DNA 
replication proteins, and mitochondrial biogenesis are expanded, and the 
accumulation of phosphatidic acid may play an important role in resistance to 
high osmotic pressure. We further investigated the morphological and 
transcriptomic changes in the macronucleus during sexual reproduction and 
highlighted the potential contribution of macronuclear residuals to this 
process. We believe that the minimized genome generated in this study provides 
novel insights into the genome streamlining theory and will be an ideal model to 
study the evolution of eukaryotic heterotrophs.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac062
PMCID: PMC9004412
PMID: 35325184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


601. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac056. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac056.

Global Population Genomics of Two Subspecies of Cryptosporidium hominis during 
500 Years of Evolution.

Tichkule S(1)(2)(3), Cacciò SM(4), Robinson G(5)(6), Chalmers RM(5)(6), Mueller 
I(1)(3), Emery-Corbin SJ(1), Eibach D(7)(8), Tyler KM(9)(10), van Oosterhout 
C(11), Jex AR(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Viale Regina 
Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(5)Cryptosporidium Reference Unit, Public Health Wales Microbiology and Health 
Protection, Singleton Hospital, Swansea, UK.
(6)Swansea University Medical School, Swansea University, Swansea, UK.
(7)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Bernhard Nocht Institute for 
Tropical Medicine Hamburg, Bernhard-Nocht-Strasse 74, 20359 Hamburg, Germany.
(8)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Hamburg-Lübeck-Borstel-Riems, 
Germany.
(9)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical School, University of East 
Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, UK.
(10)Center of Excellence for Bionanoscience Research, King Abdul Aziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(11)School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich 
Research Park, Norwich, UK.
(12)Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Cryptosporidiosis is a major global health problem and a primary cause of 
diarrhea, particularly in young children in low- and middle-income countries 
(LMICs). The zoonotic Cryptosporidium parvum and anthroponotic Cryptosporidium 
hominis cause most human infections. Here, we present a comprehensive 
whole-genome study of C. hominis, comprising 114 isolates from 16 countries 
within five continents. We detect two lineages with distinct biology and 
demography, which diverged circa 500 years ago. We consider these lineages two 
subspecies and propose the names C. hominis hominis and C. hominis aquapotentis 
(gp60 subtype IbA10G2). In our study, C. h. hominis is almost exclusively 
represented by isolates from LMICs in Africa and Asia and appears to have 
undergone recent population contraction. In contrast, C. h. aquapotentis was 
found in high-income countries, mainly in Europe, North America, and Oceania, 
and appears to be expanding. Notably, C. h. aquapotentis is associated with high 
rates of direct human-to-human transmission, which may explain its success in 
countries with well-developed environmental sanitation infrastructure. 
Intriguingly, we detected genomic regions of introgression following secondary 
contact between the subspecies. This resulted in high diversity and divergence 
in genomic islands of putative virulence genes, including muc5 (CHUDEA2_430) and 
a hypothetical protein (CHUDEA6_5270). This diversity is maintained by balancing 
selection, suggesting a co-evolutionary arms race with the host. Finally, we 
find that recent gene flow from C. h. aquapotentis to C. h. hominis, likely 
associated with increased human migration, maybe driving the evolution of more 
virulent C. hominis variants.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac056
PMCID: PMC9004413
PMID: 35302613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


602. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac057. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac057.

Phylogeny-Aware Chemoinformatic Analysis of Chemical Diversity in Lamiaceae 
Enables Iridoid Pathway Assembly and Discovery of Aucubin Synthase.

Rodríguez-López CE(1), Jiang Y(1), Kamileen MO(1), Lichman BR(2), Hong B(1), 
Vaillancourt B(3), Buell CR(4), O'Connor SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Natural Product Biosynthesis, Max Planck Institute for Chemical 
Ecology, 07745 Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, University of York, YO10 5DD York, UK.
(3)Center for Applied Genetic Technologies, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 
30602, USA.
(4)Department of Crop & Soil Sciences, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, 
USA.

Countless reports describe the isolation and structural characterization of 
natural products, yet this information remains disconnected and underutilized. 
Using a cheminformatics approach, we leverage the reported observations of 
iridoid glucosides with the known phylogeny of a large iridoid producing plant 
family (Lamiaceae) to generate a set of biosynthetic pathways that best explain 
the extant iridoid chemical diversity. We developed a pathway reconstruction 
algorithm that connects iridoid reports via reactions and prunes this solution 
space by considering phylogenetic relationships between genera. We formulate a 
model that emulates the evolution of iridoid glucosides to create a synthetic 
data set, used to select the parameters that would best reconstruct the 
pathways, and apply them to the iridoid data set to generate pathway hypotheses. 
These computationally generated pathways were then used as the basis by which to 
select and screen biosynthetic enzyme candidates. Our model was successfully 
applied to discover a cytochrome P450 enzyme from Callicarpa americana that 
catalyzes the oxidation of bartsioside to aucubin, predicted by our model 
despite neither molecule having been observed in the genus. We also demonstrate 
aucubin synthase activity in orthologues of Vitex agnus-castus, and the outgroup 
Paulownia tomentosa, further strengthening the hypothesis, enabled by our model, 
that the reaction was present in the ancestral biosynthetic pathway. This is the 
first systematic hypothesis on the epi-iridoid glucosides biosynthesis in 25 
years and sets the stage for streamlined work on the iridoid pathway. This work 
highlights how curation and computational analysis of widely available 
structural data can facilitate hypothesis-based gene discovery.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac057
PMCID: PMC9048965
PMID: 35298643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


603. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac058. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac058.

Gattaca: Base-Pair Resolution Mutation Tracking for Somatic Evolution Studies 
using Agent-based Models.

Schenck RO(1)(2), Brosula G(1), West J(1), Leedham S(1), Shibata D(3), Anderson 
ARA(1).

Author information:
(1)Integrated Mathematical Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research 
Institute, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX37BN, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Keck School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Research over the past two decades has made substantial inroads into our 
understanding of somatic mutations. Recently, these studies have focused on 
understanding their presence in homeostatic tissue. In parallel, agent-based 
mechanistic models have emerged as an important tool for understanding somatic 
mutation in tissue; yet no common methodology currently exists to provide 
base-pair resolution data for these models. Here, we present Gattaca as the 
first method for introducing and tracking somatic mutations at the base-pair 
resolution within agent-based models that typically lack nuclei. With nuclei 
that incorporate human reference genomes, mutational context, and sequence 
coverage/error information, Gattaca is able to realistically evolve sequence 
data, facilitating comparisons between in silico cell tissue modeling with 
experimental human somatic mutation data. This user-friendly method, 
incorporated into each in silico cell, allows us to fully capture somatic 
mutation spectra and evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac058
PMCID: PMC9034688
PMID: 35298641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


604. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac045. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac045.

Episodes of Diversification and Isolation in Island Southeast Asian and Near 
Oceanian Male Lineages.

Karmin M(1)(2), Flores R(2)(3), Saag L(2), Hudjashov G(1)(2), Brucato N(4), 
Crenna-Darusallam C(5), Larena M(6), Endicott PL(2)(7), Jakobsson M(6), Lansing 
JS(8)(9), Sudoyo H(5), Leavesley M(10)(11), Metspalu M(2), Ricaut FX(4), Cox 
MP(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
(2)Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Laboratoire Evolution et Diversité Biologique (EDB UMR 5174), Université de 
Toulouse Midi-Pyrénées, CNRS, IRD, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(5)Genome Diversity and Disease Laboratory, Eijkman Institute for Molecular 
Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(6)Department of Organismal Biology, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
(7)Department Hommes Natures Societies, Musée de l'Homme, Paris, France.
(8)Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(9)Santa Fe Institute Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, 
Stanford University, Santa Fe, USA.
(10)School of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Papua New Guinea, 
National Capital District, Papua New Guinea.
(11)CABAH and College of Arts, Society and Education, James Cook University, 
Cairns, QLD, Australia.

Island Southeast Asia (ISEA) and Oceania host one of the world's richest 
assemblages of human phenotypic, linguistic, and cultural diversity. Despite 
this, the region's male genetic lineages are globally among the last to remain 
unresolved. We compiled ∼9.7 Mb of Y chromosome (chrY) sequence from a diverse 
sample of over 380 men from this region, including 152 first reported here. The 
granularity of this data set allows us to fully resolve and date the regional 
chrY phylogeny. This new high-resolution tree confirms two main population 
bursts: multiple rapid diversifications following the region's initial 
settlement ∼50 kya, and extensive expansions <6 kya. Notably, ∼40-25 kya the 
deep rooting local lineages of C-M130, M-P256, and S-B254 show almost no further 
branching events in ISEA, New Guinea, and Australia, matching a similar pause in 
diversification seen in maternal mitochondrial DNA lineages. The main local 
lineages start diversifying ∼25 kya, at the time of the last glacial maximum. 
This improved chrY topology highlights localized events with important 
historical implications, including pre-Holocene contact between Mainland and 
ISEA, potential interactions between Australia and the Papuan world, and a 
sustained period of diversification following the flooding of the ancient Sunda 
and Sahul continents as the insular landscape observed today formed. The 
high-resolution phylogeny of the chrY presented here thus enables a detailed 
exploration of past isolation, interaction, and change in one of the world's 
least understood regions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac045
PMCID: PMC8926390
PMID: 35294555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


605. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac049. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac049.

Rapid Decline of Ceftazidime Resistance in Antibiotic-Free and Sublethal 
Environments Is Contingent on Genetic Background.

Hernando-Amado S(1), Laborda P(1), Valverde JR(1), Martínez JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Trade-offs of antibiotic resistance evolution, such as fitness cost and 
collateral sensitivity (CS), could be exploited to drive evolution toward 
antibiotic susceptibility. Decline of resistance may occur when resistance to 
other drug leads to CS to the first one and when compensatory mutations, or 
genetic reversion of the original ones, reduce fitness cost. Here we describe 
the impact of antibiotic-free and sublethal environments on declining 
ceftazidime resistance in different Pseudomonas aeruginosa resistant mutants. We 
determined that decline of ceftazidime resistance occurs within 450 generations, 
which is caused by newly acquired mutations and not by reversion of the original 
ones, and that the original CS of these mutants is preserved. In addition, we 
observed that the frequency and degree of this decline is contingent on genetic 
background. Our results are relevant to implement evolution-based therapeutic 
approaches, as well as to redefine global policies of antibiotic use, such as 
drug cycling.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac049
PMCID: PMC8935207
PMID: 35291010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


606. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 10;39(4):msac050. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac050.

Quantitative Lipidomics and Spatial MS-Imaging Uncovered Neurological and 
Systemic Lipid Metabolic Pathways Underlying Troglomorphic Adaptations in 
Cave-Dwelling Fish.

Lam SM(1)(2), Li J(1)(3), Sun H(1)(3), Mao W(4), Lu Z(4), Zhao Q(5)(6), Han 
C(7), Gong X(1), Jiang B(2), Chua GH(2), Zhao Z(7), Meng F(5)(6), Shui G(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of 
Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)LipidALL Technologies Company Limited, Changzhou, Jiangsu Province, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Qujing Aquaculture Station, Qujing, Yunan Province, China.
(5)Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute for Stem Cell and Regeneration, 
Beijing, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(7)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, CAS Research/Education 
Center for Excellence in Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Analytical 
Chemistry for Living Biosystems, Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing Mass Spectrum Center, Beijing, China.

Sinocyclocheilus represents a rare, freshwater teleost genus endemic to China 
that comprises the river-dwelling surface fish and the cave-dwelling cavefish. 
Using a combinatorial approach of quantitative lipidomics and mass-spectrometry 
imaging (MSI), we demonstrated that neural compartmentalization of lipid 
distribution and lipid metabolism is associated with the evolution of 
troglomorphic traits in Sinocyclocheilus. Attenuated docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) 
biosynthesis via the Δ4 desaturase pathway led to reductions in 
DHA-phospholipids in cavefish cerebellum. Instead, cavefish accumulates 
arachidonic acid-phospholipids that may disfavor retinotectal arbor growth. 
Importantly, MSI of sulfatides coupled with immunostaining of myelin basic 
protein and transmission electron microscopy images of hindbrain axons revealed 
demyelination in cavefish raphe serotonergic neurons. Demyelination in cavefish 
parallels the loss of neuroplasticity governing social behavior such as 
aggressive dominance. Outside the brain, quantitative lipidomics and qRT-PCR 
revealed systemic reductions in membrane esterified DHAs in the liver, 
attributed to suppression of genes along the Sprecher pathway (elovl2, elovl5, 
and acox1). Development of fatty livers was observed in cavefish; likely 
mediated by an impeded mobilization of storage lipids, as evident in the 
diminished expressions of pnpla2, lipea, lipeb, dagla, and mgll; and suppressed 
β-oxidation of fatty acyls via both mitochondria and peroxisomes as reflected in 
the reduced expressions of cpt1ab, hadhaa, cpt2, decr1, and acox1. These 
neurological and systemic metabolic adaptations serve to reduce energy 
expenditure, forming the basis of recessive evolution that eliminates 
nonessential morphological and behavioral traits and giving cavefish a selective 
advantage to thrive in caves where proper resource allocation becomes a major 
determinant of survival.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac050
PMCID: PMC9011034
PMID: 35277964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


607. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac051. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac051.

Premetazoan Origin of Neuropeptide Signaling.

Yañez-Guerra LA(1), Thiel D(1), Jékely G(1).

Author information:
(1)Living Systems Institute, University of Exeter, Stocker Road, Exeter, United 
Kingdom.

Neuropeptides are a diverse class of signaling molecules in metazoans. They 
occur in all animals with a nervous system and also in neuron-less placozoans. 
However, their origin has remained unclear because no neuropeptide shows deep 
homology across lineages, and none have been found in sponges. Here, we identify 
two neuropeptide precursors, phoenixin (PNX) and nesfatin, with broad 
evolutionary conservation. By database searches, sequence alignments, and 
gene-structure comparisons, we show that both precursors are present in 
bilaterians, cnidarians, ctenophores, and sponges. We also found PNX and a 
secreted nesfatin precursor homolog in the choanoflagellate Salpingoeca rosetta. 
PNX, in particular, is highly conserved, including its cleavage sites, 
suggesting that prohormone processing occurs also in choanoflagellates. In 
addition, based on phyletic patterns and negative pharmacological assays, we 
question the originally proposed GPR-173 (SREB3) as a PNX receptor. Our findings 
revealed that secreted neuropeptide homologs derived from longer precursors have 
premetazoan origins and thus evolved before neurons.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac051
PMCID: PMC9004410
PMID: 35277960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


608. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac055. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac055.

Gene Regulatory Networks of Epidermal and Neural Fate Choice in a Chordate.

Leon A(1), Subirana L(1), Magre K(1), Cases I(2), Tena JJ(2), Irimia M(3)(4)(5), 
Gomez-Skarmeta JL(2), Escriva H(1), Bertrand S(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Biologie Intégrative des Organismes Marins, BIOM, 
Laboratoire Arago, Avenue Pierre Fabre, F-66650 Banyuls-sur-Mer, France.
(2)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD), CSIC-Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide-Junta de Andalucía, Sevilla, Spain.
(3)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona 08003, Spain.
(5)ICREA, Barcelona, Spain.

Neurons are a highly specialized cell type only found in metazoans. They can be 
scattered throughout the body or grouped together, forming ganglia or nerve 
cords. During embryogenesis, centralized nervous systems develop from the 
ectoderm, which also forms the epidermis. How pluripotent ectodermal cells are 
directed toward neural or epidermal fates, and to which extent this process is 
shared among different animal lineages, are still open questions. Here, by using 
micromere explants, we were able to define in silico the putative gene 
regulatory networks (GRNs) underlying the first steps of the epidermis and the 
central nervous system formation in the cephalochordate amphioxus. We propose 
that although the signal triggering neural induction in amphioxus (i.e., Nodal) 
is different from vertebrates, the main transcription factors implicated in this 
process are conserved. Moreover, our data reveal that transcription factors of 
the neural program seem to not only activate neural genes but also to 
potentially have direct inputs into the epidermal GRN, suggesting that the Nodal 
signal might also contribute to neural fate commitment by repressing the 
epidermal program. Our functional data on whole embryos support this result and 
highlight the complex interactions among the transcription factors activated by 
the signaling pathways that drive ectodermal cell fate choice in chordates.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac055
PMCID: PMC9004418
PMID: 35276009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


609. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac053. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac053.

Canalization of the Polygenic Risk for Common Diseases and Traits in the UK 
Biobank Cohort.

Nagpal S(1), Tandon R(2), Gibson G(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, and Center for Integrative Genomics, Georgia 
Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, and Center for 
Machine Learning, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Since organisms develop and thrive in the face of constant perturbations due to 
environmental and genetic variation, species may evolve resilient genetic 
architectures. We sought evidence for this process, known as canalization, 
through a comparison of the prevalence of phenotypes as a function of the 
polygenic score (PGS) across environments in the UK Biobank cohort study. 
Contrasting seven diseases and three categorical phenotypes with respect to 151 
exposures in 408,925 people, the deviation between the prevalence-risk curves 
was observed to increase monotonically with the PGS percentile in one-fifth of 
the comparisons, suggesting extensive PGS-by-Environment (PGS×E) interaction. 
After adjustment for the dependency of allelic effect sizes on increased 
prevalence in the perturbing environment, cases where polygenic influences are 
greater or lesser than expected are seen to be particularly pervasive for 
educational attainment, obesity, and metabolic condition type-2 diabetes. 
Inflammatory bowel disease analysis shows fewer interactions but confirms that 
smoking and some aspects of diet influence risk. Notably, body mass index has 
more evidence for decanalization (increased genetic influence at the extremes of 
polygenic risk), whereas the waist-to-hip ratio shows canalization, reflecting 
different evolutionary pressures on the architectures of these weight-related 
traits. An additional 10 % of comparisons showed evidence for an additive shift 
of prevalence independent of PGS between exposures. These results provide the 
first widespread evidence for canalization protecting against disease in humans 
and have implications for personalized medicine as well as understanding the 
evolution of complex traits. The findings can be explored through an R shiny app 
at https://canalization-gibsonlab.shinyapps.io/rshiny/.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac053
PMCID: PMC9004416
PMID: 35275999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


610. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Apr 11;39(4):msac054. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac054.

Looking through the Lens of the Ribosome Biogenesis Evolutionary History: 
Possible Implications for Archaeal Phylogeny and Eukaryogenesis.

Jüttner M(1), Ferreira-Cerca S(1).

Author information:
(1)Regensburg Center for Biochemistry, Biochemistry III - Institute for 
Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, 
Germany.

Our understanding of microbial diversity and its evolutionary relationships has 
increased substantially over the last decade. Such an understanding has been 
greatly fueled by culture-independent metagenomics analyses. However, the 
outcome of some of these studies and their biological and evolutionary 
implications, such as the origin of the eukaryotic lineage from the recently 
discovered archaeal Asgard superphylum, is debated. The sequences of the 
ribosomal constituents are amongst the most used phylogenetic markers. However, 
the functional consequences underlying the analysed sequence diversity and their 
putative evolutionary implications are essentially not taken into consideration. 
Here, we propose to exploit additional functional hallmarks of ribosome 
biogenesis to help disentangle competing evolutionary hypotheses. Using selected 
examples, such as the multiple origins of halophily in archaea or the 
evolutionary relationship between the Asgard archaea and Eukaryotes, we 
illustrate and discuss how function-aware phylogenetic framework can contribute 
to refining our understanding of archaeal phylogeny and the origin of eukaryotic 
cells.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac054
PMCID: PMC8997704
PMID: 35275997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


611. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac048. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac048.

Population-Genomic Analysis Identifies a Low Rate of Global Adaptive Fixation in 
the Proteins of the Cyclical Parthenogen Daphnia magna.

Fields PD(1), McTaggart S(2), Reisser CMO(3)(4), Haag C(3), Palmer WH(2), Little 
TJ(2), Ebert D(1), Obbard DJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Zoology, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Evolutionary Biology; School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)CEFE, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, EPHE, IRD, Montpellier, France.
(4)MARBEC, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, IFREMER, IRD, Montpellier, France.

Daphnia are well-established ecological and evolutionary models, and the 
interaction between D. magna and its microparasites is widely considered a 
paragon of the host-parasite coevolutionary process. Like other well-studied 
arthropods such as Drosophila melanogaster and Anopheles gambiae, D. magna is a 
small, widespread, and abundant species that is therefore expected to display a 
large long-term population size and high rates of adaptive protein evolution. 
However, unlike these other species, D. magna is cyclically asexual and lives in 
a highly structured environment (ponds and lakes) with moderate levels of 
dispersal, both of which are predicted to impact upon long-term effective 
population size and adaptive protein evolution. To investigate patterns of 
adaptive protein fixation, we produced the complete coding genomes of 36 
D. magna clones sampled from across the European range (Western Palaearctic), 
along with draft sequences for the close relatives D. similis and D. lumholtzi, 
used as outgroups. We analyzed genome-wide patterns of adaptive fixation, with a 
particular focus on genes that have an a priori expectation of high rates, such 
as those likely to mediate immune responses, RNA interference against viruses 
and transposable elements, and those with a strongly male-biased expression 
pattern. We find that, as expected, D. magna displays high levels of diversity 
and that this is highly structured among populations. However, compared with 
Drosophila, we find that D. magna proteins appear to have a high proportion of 
weakly deleterious variants and do not show evidence of pervasive adaptive 
fixation across its entire range. This is true of the genome as a whole, and 
also of putative 'arms race' genes that often show elevated levels of adaptive 
substitution in other species. In addition to the likely impact of extensive, 
and previously documented, local adaptation, we speculate that these findings 
may reflect reduced efficacy of selection associated with cyclical asexual 
reproduction.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac048
PMCID: PMC8963301
PMID: 35244177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


612. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac043. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac043.

Embracing Green Computing in Molecular Phylogenetics.

Kumar S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac034.

Molecular evolutionary analyses require computationally intensive steps such as 
aligning multiple sequences, optimizing substitution models, inferring 
evolutionary trees, testing phylogenies by bootstrap analysis, and estimating 
divergence times. With the rise of large genomic data sets, phylogenomics is 
imposing a big carbon footprint on the environment with consequences for the 
planet's health. Electronic waste and energy usage are large environmental 
issues. Fortunately, innovative methods and heuristics are available to shrink 
the carbon footprint, presenting researchers with opportunities to lower the 
environmental costs and greener evolutionary computing. Green computing will 
also enable greater scientific rigor and encourage broader participation in big 
data analytics.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac043
PMCID: PMC8894743
PMID: 35243506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


613. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jun 2;39(6):msac047. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac047.

GroEL/S Overexpression Helps to Purge Deleterious Mutations and Reduce Genetic 
Diversity during Adaptive Protein Evolution.

Iyengar BR(1)(2), Wagner A(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Quartier Sorge-Batiment Genopode, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA.
(4)Wallenberg Research Centre, Stellenbosch Institute for Advanced Study 
(STIAS), Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.

Chaperones are proteins that help other proteins fold. They also affect the 
adaptive evolution of their client proteins by buffering the effect of 
deleterious mutations and increasing the genetic diversity of evolving proteins. 
We study how the bacterial chaperone GroE (GroEL+GroES) affects the evolution of 
green fluorescent protein (GFP). To this end, we subjected GFP to multiple 
rounds of mutation and selection for its color phenotype in four replicate 
Escherichia coli populations, and studied its evolutionary dynamics through 
high-throughput sequencing and mutant engineering. We evolved GFP both under 
stabilizing selection for its ancestral (green) phenotype, and to directional 
selection for a new (cyan) phenotype. We did so both under low and high 
expression of the chaperone GroE. In contrast to previous work, we observe that 
GroE does not just buffer but also helps purge deleterious (fluorescence 
reducing) mutations from evolving populations. In doing so, GroE helps reduce 
the genetic diversity of evolving populations. In addition, it causes phenotypic 
heterogeneity in mutants with the same genotype, helping to enhance their 
fluorescence in some cells, and reducing it in others. Our observations show 
that chaperones can affect adaptive evolution in more than one way.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac047
PMCID: PMC9188349
PMID: 35234895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


614. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac046. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac046.

The Runaway Evolution of SARS-CoV-2 Leading to the Highly Evolved Delta Strain.

Ruan Y(1), Hou M(1), Tang X(2), He X(1), Lu X(3), Lu J(2), Wu CI(1), Wen H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Southern Marine 
Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, Center for 
Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.

In new epidemics after the host shift, the pathogens may experience accelerated 
evolution driven by novel selective pressures. When the accelerated evolution 
enters a positive feedback loop with the expanding epidemics, the pathogen's 
runaway evolution may be triggered. To test this possibility in coronavirus 
disease 2019 (COVID-19), we analyze the extensive databases and identify five 
major waves of strains, one replacing the previous one in 2020-2021. The 
mutations differ entirely between waves and the number of mutations continues to 
increase, from 3-4 to 21-31. The latest wave in the fall of 2021 is the Delta 
strain which accrues 31 new mutations to become highly prevalent. Interestingly, 
these new mutations in Delta strain emerge in multiple stages with each stage 
driven by 6-12 coding mutations that form a fitness group. In short, the 
evolution of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) from 
the oldest to the youngest wave, and from the earlier to the later stages of the 
Delta wave, is a process of acceleration with more and more mutations. The 
global increase in the viral population size (M(t), at time t) and the mutation 
accumulation (R(t)) may have indeed triggered the runaway evolution in late 
2020, leading to the highly evolved Alpha and then Delta strain. To suppress the 
pandemic, it is crucial to break the positive feedback loop between M(t) and 
R(t), neither of which has yet to be effectively dampened by late 2021. New 
waves after Delta, hence, should not be surprising.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac046
PMCID: PMC8903489
PMID: 35234869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


615. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac044. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac044.

Transcription Factors Evolve Faster Than Their Structural Gene Targets in the 
Flavonoid Pigment Pathway.

Wheeler LC(1), Walker JF(2)(3), Ng J(1), Deanna R(1)(4), Dunbar-Wallis A(1), 
Backes A(5), Pezzi PH(5), Palchetti MV(4), Robertson HM(2), Monaghan A(6), de 
Freitas LB(5), Barboza GE(4)(7), Moyroud E(2), Smith SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, CO, USA.
(2)Sainsbury Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Instituto Multidisciplinario de Biología Vegetal (IMBIV), CONICET and 
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Evolution, Department of Genetics, Universidade 
Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(6)Research Computing, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA.
(7)Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Haya de la 
Torre y Medina Allende, Córdoba, Argentina.

Dissecting the relationship between gene function and substitution rates is key 
to understanding genome-wide patterns of molecular evolution. Biochemical 
pathways provide powerful systems for investigating this relationship because 
the functional role of each gene is often well characterized. Here, we 
investigate the evolution of the flavonoid pigment pathway in the colorful 
Petunieae clade of the tomato family (Solanaceae). This pathway is broadly 
conserved in plants, both in terms of its structural elements and its MYB, basic 
helix-loop-helix, and WD40 transcriptional regulators, and its function has been 
extensively studied, particularly in model species of petunia. We built a 
phylotranscriptomic data set for 69 species of Petunieae to infer patterns of 
molecular evolution across pathway genes and across lineages. We found that 
transcription factors exhibit faster rates of molecular evolution (dN/dS) than 
their targets, with the highly specialized MYB genes evolving fastest. Using the 
largest comparative data set to date, we recovered little support for the 
hypothesis that upstream enzymes evolve slower than those occupying more 
downstream positions, although expression levels do predict molecular 
evolutionary rates. Although shifts in floral pigmentation were only weakly 
related to changes affecting coding regions, we found a strong relationship with 
the presence/absence patterns of MYB transcripts. Intensely pigmented species 
express all three main MYB anthocyanin activators in petals, whereas pale or 
white species express few or none. Our findings reinforce the notion that 
pathway regulators have a dynamic history, involving higher rates of molecular 
evolution than structural components, along with frequent changes in expression 
during color transitions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac044
PMCID: PMC8911815
PMID: 35212724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


616. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac039. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac039.

Fine-Scale Genetic Structure in the United Arab Emirates Reflects Endogamous and 
Consanguineous Culture, Population History, and Geography.

Elliott KS(1), Haber M(2), Daggag H(3), Busby GB(1)(4), Sarwar R(5), Kennet 
D(6), Petraglia M(7), Petherbridge LJ(1), Yavari P(1), Heard-Bey FU(8), Shobi 
B(3), Ghulam T(3), Haj D(3), Al Tikriti A(3), Mohammad A(3), Antony S(3), 
Alyileili M(3), Alaydaroos S(3), Lau E(1), Butler M(5), Yavari A(5), Knight 
JC(1), Ashrafian H(5), Barakat MT(3).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, Centre for Computational Biology, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Imperial College London Diabetes Centre, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
(4)Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Experimental Therapeutics, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Archaeology, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom.
(7)Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena, Germany.
(8)National Archives, Abu Dhabi, UAE.

The indigenous population of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) has a unique 
demographic and cultural history. Its tradition of endogamy and consanguinity is 
expected to produce genetic homogeneity and partitioning of gene pools while 
population movements and intercontinental trade are likely to have contributed 
to genetic diversity. Emiratis and neighboring populations of the Middle East 
have been underrepresented in the population genetics literature with few 
studies covering the broader genetic history of the Arabian Peninsula. Here, we 
genotyped 1,198 individuals from the seven Emirates using 1.7 million markers 
and by employing haplotype-based algorithms and admixture analyses, we reveal 
the fine-scale genetic structure of the Emirati population. Shared ancestry and 
gene flow with neighboring populations display their unique geographic position 
while increased intra- versus inter-Emirati kinship and sharing of uniparental 
haplogroups, reflect the endogamous and consanguineous cultural traditions of 
the Emirates and their tribes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac039
PMCID: PMC8911814
PMID: 35192718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


617. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac042. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac042.

Convergent Adaptation of Ootheca Formation as a Reproductive Strategy in 
Polyneoptera.

Du E(1)(2)(3), Wang S(1), Luan YX(1), Zhou C(1), Li Z(1), Li N(1)(3), Zhou S(4), 
Zhang T(5)(6), Ma W(1), Cui Y(1), Yuan D(1), Ren C(1), Zhang J(5), Roth S(6), Li 
S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental Biology and 
Applied Technology, Institute of Insect Science and Technology & School of Life 
Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental Biology and 
Applied Technology, Guangmeiyuan R&D Center, South China Normal University, 
Meizhou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Plant Stress Biology, State Key Laboratory of Cotton 
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng, China.
(5)Research Institute of Applied Biology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China.
(6)Institute for Zoology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Insects have evolved numerous adaptations and colonized diverse terrestrial 
environments. Several polyneopterans, including dictyopterans (cockroaches and 
mantids) and locusts, have developed oothecae, but little is known about the 
molecular mechanism, physiological function, and evolutionary significance of 
ootheca formation. Here, we demonstrate that the cockroach asymmetric 
colleterial glands produce vitellogenins, proline-rich protein, and glycine-rich 
protein as major ootheca structural proteins (OSPs) that undergo sclerotization 
and melanization for ootheca formation through the cooperative protocatechuic 
acid pathway and dopachrome and dopaminechrome subpathway. Functionally, OSP 
sclerotization and melanization prevent eggs from losing water at warm and dry 
conditions, and thus effectively maintain embryo viability. Dictyopterans and 
locusts convergently evolved vitellogenins, apolipoprotein D, and laminins as 
OSPs, whereas within Dictyoptera, cockroaches and mantids independently 
developed glycine-rich protein and fibroins as OSPs. Highlighting the 
ecological-evolutionary importance, convergent ootheca formation represents a 
successful reproductive strategy in Polyneoptera that promoted the radiation and 
establishment of cockroaches, mantids, and locusts.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac042
PMCID: PMC8892946
PMID: 35192709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


618. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac041. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac041.

IAGS: Inferring Ancestor Genome Structure under a Wide Range of Evolutionary 
Scenarios.

Gao S(1)(2), Yang X(2)(3)(4), Sun J(5), Zhao X(4), Wang B(1)(2), Ye 
K(1)(2)(4)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Automation Science and Engineering, Faculty of Electronic and 
Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(2)MOE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks & Networks Security, Faculty of 
Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi, China.
(3)School of Computer Science and Technology, Faculty of Electronic and 
Information Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(4)Genome Institute, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, 
Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(5)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi, China.
(6)School of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi, China.
(7)Faculty of Science, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Significant improvements in genome sequencing and assembly technology have led 
to increasing numbers of high-quality genomes, revealing complex evolutionary 
scenarios such as multiple whole-genome duplication events, which hinders 
ancestral genome reconstruction via the currently available computational 
frameworks. Here, we present the Inferring Ancestor Genome Structure (IAGS) 
framework, a novel block/endpoint matching optimization strategy with 
single-cut-or-join distance, to allow ancestral genome reconstruction under both 
simple (single-copy ancestor) and complex (multicopy ancestor) scenarios. We 
evaluated IAGS with two simulated data sets and applied it to four different 
real evolutionary scenarios to demonstrate its performance and general 
applicability. IAGS is available at https://github.com/xjtu-omics/IAGS.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac041
PMCID: PMC8896626
PMID: 35176153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


619. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac040. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac040.

Phylodynamic Inference of Bacterial Outbreak Parameters Using Nanopore 
Sequencing.

Steinig E(1)(2), Duchêne S(1), Aglua I(3), Greenhill A(4), Ford R(4), Yoannes 
M(4), Jaworski J(3), Drekore J(5), Urakoko B(3), Poka H(3), Wurr C(6), Ebos 
E(6), Nangen D(6), Manning L(7)(8), Laman M(4), Firth C(2), Smith S(9), Pomat 
W(4), Tong SYC(1)(10), Coin L(1), McBryde E(2), Horwood P(4)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The University of Melbourne at the Peter 
Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia.
(2)Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University, 
Townsville and Cairns, Australia.
(3)Joseph Nombri Memorial-Kundiawa General Hospital, Kundiawa, Papua New Guinea.
(4)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Goroka, Papua, Papua New 
Guinea.
(5)Simbu Children's Foundation, Kundiawa, Papua New Guinea.
(6)Surgical Department, Goroka General Hospital, Goroka, Papua New Guinea.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch, 
Australia.
(8)Medical School, University of Western Australia, Harry Perkins Research 
Institute, Fiona Stanley Hospital, Murdoch, Australia.
(9)Cairns Hospital and Hinterland Health Service, Queensland Health, Cairns, 
Australia.
(10)Victorian Infectious Diseases Service, The Royal Melbourne Hospital at the 
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Australia.
(11)College of Public Health, Medical & Veterinary Sciences, James Cook 
University, Townsville, Australia.

Nanopore sequencing and phylodynamic modeling have been used to reconstruct the 
transmission dynamics of viral epidemics, but their application to bacterial 
pathogens has remained challenging. Cost-effective bacterial genome sequencing 
and variant calling on nanopore platforms would greatly enhance surveillance and 
outbreak response in communities without access to sequencing infrastructure. 
Here, we adapt random forest models for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
polishing developed by Sanderson and colleagues (2020. High precision Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae variant and antimicrobial resistance calling from metagenomic 
nanopore sequencing. Genome Res. 30(9):1354-1363) to estimate divergence and 
effective reproduction numbers (Re) of two methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA) outbreaks from remote communities in Far North Queensland and 
Papua New Guinea (PNG; n = 159). Successive barcoded panels of S. aureus 
isolates (2 × 12 per MinION) sequenced at low coverage (>5× to 10×) provided 
sufficient data to accurately infer genotypes with high recall when compared 
with Illumina references. Random forest models achieved high resolution on ST93 
outbreak sequence types (>90% accuracy and precision) and enabled phylodynamic 
inference of epidemiological parameters using birth-death skyline models. Our 
method reproduced phylogenetic topology, origin of the outbreaks, and 
indications of epidemic growth (Re > 1). Nextflow pipelines implement SNP 
polisher training, evaluation, and outbreak alignments, enabling reconstruction 
of within-lineage transmission dynamics for infection control of bacterial 
disease outbreaks on portable nanopore platforms. Our study shows that nanopore 
technology can be used for bacterial outbreak reconstruction at competitive 
costs, providing opportunities for infection control in hospitals and 
communities without access to sequencing infrastructure, such as in remote 
northern Australia and PNG.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac040
PMCID: PMC8963328
PMID: 35171290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


620. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac037. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac037.

Host Adaptation in Legionellales Is 1.9 Ga, Coincident with Eukaryogenesis.

Hugoson E(1)(2), Guliaev A(1), Ammunét T(1), Guy L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life 
Laboratories, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Microbial Population Biology, Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.

Bacteria adapting to living in a host cell caused the most salient events in the 
evolution of eukaryotes, namely the seminal fusion with an archaeon, and the 
emergence of both mitochondrion and chloroplast. A bacterial clade that may hold 
the key to understanding these events is the deep-branching gammaproteobacterial 
order Legionellales-containing among others Coxiella and Legionella-of which all 
known members grow inside eukaryotic cells. Here, by analyzing 35 novel 
Legionellales genomes mainly acquired through metagenomics, we show that this 
group is much more diverse than previously thought, and that key host-adaptation 
events took place very early in its evolution. Crucial virulence factors like 
the Type IVB secretion (Dot/Icm) system and two shared effector proteins were 
gained in the last Legionellales common ancestor (LLCA). Many metabolic gene 
families were lost in LLCA and its immediate descendants, including functions 
directly and indirectly related to molybdenum metabolism. On the other hand, 
genome sizes increased in the ancestors of the Legionella genus. We estimate 
that LLCA lived approximately 1.89 Ga, probably predating the last eukaryotic 
common ancestor by approximately 0.4-1.0 Gy. These elements strongly indicate 
that host adaptation arose only once in Legionellales, and that these bacteria 
were using advanced molecular machinery to exploit and manipulate host cells 
early in eukaryogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac037
PMCID: PMC8896642
PMID: 35167692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


621. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac038. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac038.

Limitations of Phylogenomic Data Can Drive Inferred Speciation Rate Shifts.

Craig JM(1)(2)(3), Kumar S(1)(2)(3)(4), Hedges SB(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biodiversity, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Center of Excellence in Genomic Medicine Research, King Abdulaziz University, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Biodiversity analyses of phylogenomic timetrees have produced many high-profile 
examples of shifts in the rate of speciation across the tree of life. Temporally 
correlated events in ecology, climate, and biogeography are frequently invoked 
to explain these rate shifts. In a re-examination of 15 genomic timetrees and 25 
major published studies of the pattern of speciation through time, we observed 
an unexpected correlation between the timing of reported rate shifts and the 
information content of sequence alignments. Here, we show that the paucity of 
sequence variation and insufficient species sampling in phylogenomic data sets 
are the likely drivers of many inferred speciation rate shifts, rather than the 
proposed biological explanations. Therefore, data limitations can produce 
predictable but spurious signals of rate shifts even when speciation rates may 
be similar across taxa and time. Our results suggest that the reliable detection 
of speciation rate shifts requires the acquisition and assembly of long 
phylogenomic alignments with near-complete species sampling and accurate 
estimates of species richness for the clades of study.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac038
PMCID: PMC8896619
PMID: 35166841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


622. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac022. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac022.

Giant Viruses Encode Actin-Related Proteins.

Da Cunha V(1), Gaia M(2), Ogata H(3), Jaillon O(2)(4), Delmont TO(2), Forterre 
P(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), Université 
Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Génomique Métabolique, Génoscope, Institut François Jacob, CEA, CNRS, 
Université d'Évry, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.
(3)Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Gokasho, Uji, Japan.
(4)Research Federation for the Study of Global Ocean Systems Ecology and 
Evolution, Tara Oceans, France.
(5)Département de Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The emergence of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton is a critical yet puzzling step of 
eukaryogenesis. Actin and actin-related proteins (ARPs) are ubiquitous 
components of this cytoskeleton. The gene repertoire of the Last Eukaryotic 
Common Ancestor (LECA) would have therefore harbored both actin and various 
ARPs. Here, we report the presence and expression of actin-related genes in 
viral genomes (viractins) of some Imitervirales, a viral order encompassing the 
giant Mimiviridae. Phylogenetic analyses suggest an early recruitment of an 
actin-related gene by viruses from ancient protoeukaryotic hosts before the 
emergence of modern eukaryotes, possibly followed by a back transfer that gave 
rise to eukaryotic actins. This supports a coevolutionary scenario between 
pre-LECA lineages and their viruses, which could have contributed to the 
emergence of the modern eukaryotic cytoskeleton.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac022
PMCID: PMC8850707
PMID: 35150280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


623. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac034. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac034.

The Carbon Footprint of Bioinformatics.

Grealey J(1)(2), Lannelongue L(3)(4)(5), Saw WY(1), Marten J(4), Méric G(1)(6), 
Ruiz-Carmona S(1), Inouye M(1)(3)(4)(5)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Baker Systems Genomics Initiative, Baker Heart and Diabetes 
Institute, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, La Trobe University, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia.
(3)Cambridge Baker Systems Genomics Initiative, Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)British Heart Foundation Cardiovascular Epidemiology Unit, Department of 
Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Health Data Research UK Cambridge, Wellcome Genome Campus and University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Central Clinical School, Monash 
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(7)British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(8)The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac043.

Bioinformatic research relies on large-scale computational infrastructures which 
have a nonzero carbon footprint but so far, no study has quantified the 
environmental costs of bioinformatic tools and commonly run analyses. In this 
work, we estimate the carbon footprint of bioinformatics (in kilograms of CO2 
equivalent units, kgCO2e) using the freely available Green Algorithms calculator 
(www.green-algorithms.org, last accessed 2022). We assessed 1) bioinformatic 
approaches in genome-wide association studies (GWAS), RNA sequencing, genome 
assembly, metagenomics, phylogenetics, and molecular simulations, as well as 2) 
computation strategies, such as parallelization, CPU (central processing unit) 
versus GPU (graphics processing unit), cloud versus local computing 
infrastructure, and geography. In particular, we found that biobank-scale GWAS 
emitted substantial kgCO2e and simple software upgrades could make it greener, 
for example, upgrading from BOLT-LMM v1 to v2.3 reduced carbon footprint by 73%. 
Moreover, switching from the average data center to a more efficient one can 
reduce carbon footprint by approximately 34%. Memory over-allocation can also be 
a substantial contributor to an algorithm's greenhouse gas emissions. The use of 
faster processors or greater parallelization reduces running time but can lead 
to greater carbon footprint. Finally, we provide guidance on how researchers can 
reduce power consumption and minimize kgCO2e. Overall, this work elucidates the 
carbon footprint of common analyses in bioinformatics and provides solutions 
which empower a move toward greener research.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac034
PMCID: PMC8892942
PMID: 35143670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


624. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac033. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac033.

Rethinking Opsins.

Feuda R(1), Menon AK(2), Göpfert MC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Cellular Neurobiology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.

Opsins, the protein moieties of animal visual photo-pigments, have emerged as 
moonlighting proteins with diverse, light-dependent and -independent 
physiological functions. This raises the need to revise some basic assumptions 
concerning opsin expression, structure, classification, and evolution.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac033
PMCID: PMC8892948
PMID: 35143663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


625. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac035. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac035.

Comparative Genomics Elucidates the Origin of a Supergene Controlling Floral 
Heteromorphism.

Potente G(1)(2)(3), Léveillé-Bourret É(1)(4), Yousefi N(1), Choudhury RR(1), 
Keller B(1), Diop SI(1)(2)(3), Duijsings D(2), Pirovano W(2), Lenhard M(5), 
Szövényi P(1)(3), Conti E(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systematic and Evolutionary Botany, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)BaseClear BV, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Zurich-Basel Plant Science Center, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Département de Sciences Biologiques, Institut de Recherche en Biologie 
Végétale, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(5)Institute for Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam-Golm, 
Germany.

Supergenes are nonrecombining genomic regions ensuring the coinheritance of 
multiple, coadapted genes. Despite the importance of supergenes in adaptation, 
little is known on how they originate. A classic example of supergene is the S 
locus controlling heterostyly, a floral heteromorphism occurring in 28 
angiosperm families. In Primula, heterostyly is characterized by the 
cooccurrence of two complementary, self-incompatible floral morphs and is 
controlled by five genes clustered in the hemizygous, ca. 300-kb S locus. Here, 
we present the first chromosome-scale genome assembly of any heterostylous 
species, that of Primula veris (cowslip). By leveraging the high contiguity of 
the P. veris assembly and comparative genomic analyses, we demonstrated that the 
S-locus evolved via multiple, asynchronous gene duplications and independent 
gene translocations. Furthermore, we discovered a new whole-genome duplication 
in Ericales that is specific to the Primula lineage. We also propose a mechanism 
for the origin of S-locus hemizygosity via nonhomologous recombination involving 
the newly discovered two pairs of CFB genes flanking the S locus. Finally, we 
detected only weak signatures of degeneration in the S locus, as predicted for 
hemizygous supergenes. The present study provides a useful resource for future 
research addressing key questions on the evolution of supergenes in general and 
the S locus in particular: How do supergenes arise? What is the role of genome 
architecture in the evolution of complex adaptations? Is the molecular 
architecture of heterostyly supergenes across angiosperms similar to that of 
Primula?

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac035
PMCID: PMC8859637
PMID: 35143659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


626. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac036. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac036.

The Toggle Switch Model for Gene Expression Change during the 
Prenatal-to-Postnatal Transition in Mammals.

Hao J(1), Hao W(2), Liu Z(1), Shi P(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)College of Mathematics, Yunnan Normal University, Kunming, China.
(3)School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

The prenatal-to-postnatal transition is a pivotal process in the life cycle 
whereby an organism shifts from responding to intrauterine cues to undergoing 
extrauterine stresses with many physiological adaptations. However, the 
molecular basis underlying the evolutionarily conserved physiological 
adaptations remains elusive. Here, we analyze the transcriptomes of seven organs 
across developmental time points from five mammalian species by constructing 
computational coexpression networks and report a developmental shift of gene 
expression at the perinatal stage. The low-to-high and high-to-low expressed 
genes tightly coalesce in the functional categories and gene regulatory pathways 
that implicate the physiological adaptions during the prenatal-to-postnatal 
transition, including lipid metabolism, circadian rhythm, immune response, cell 
cycle, and cell division. The low-to-high and high-to-low expressed genes around 
the perinatal stage tend to form the mutually inhibitory toggle switch gene 
pairs linking the gene regulatory networks in response to the environmental 
changes. We thus propose the toggle switch model for the developmental shift of 
gene expression as a mechanic framework to investigate how the physiological 
adaptations occur during the prenatal-to-postnatal transition.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac036
PMCID: PMC8892945
PMID: 35143657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


627. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac032. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac032.

In Vitro Evolution Reveals Noncationic Protein-RNA Interaction Mediated by Metal 
Ions.

Giacobelli VG(1), Fujishima K(2)(3), Lepšík M(4), Tretyachenko V(1), Kadavá 
T(5), Makarov M(1), Bednárová L(4), Novák P(6), Hlouchová K(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Media and Governance, Keio University, Fujisawa, Japan.
(4)Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Sciences, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(6)Institute of Microbiology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Vestec, Czech Republic.

RNA-peptide/protein interactions have been of utmost importance to life since 
its earliest forms, reaching even before the last universal common ancestor 
(LUCA). However, the ancient molecular mechanisms behind this key biological 
interaction remain enigmatic because extant RNA-protein interactions rely 
heavily on positively charged and aromatic amino acids that were absent (or 
heavily under-represented) in the early pre-LUCA evolutionary period. Here, an 
RNA-binding variant of the ribosomal uL11 C-terminal domain was selected from an 
approximately 1010 library of partially randomized sequences, all composed of 
ten prebiotically plausible canonical amino acids. The selected variant binds to 
the cognate RNA with a similar overall affinity although it is less structured 
in the unbound form than the wild-type protein domain. The variant complex 
association and dissociation are both slower than for the wild-type, implying 
different mechanistic processes involved. The profile of the wild-type and 
mutant complex stabilities along with molecular dynamics simulations uncovers 
qualitative differences in the interaction modes. In the absence of positively 
charged and aromatic residues, the mutant uL11 domain uses ion bridging 
(K+/Mg2+) interactions between the RNA sugar-phosphate backbone and glutamic 
acid residues as an alternative source of stabilization. This study presents 
experimental support to provide a new perspective on how early protein-RNA 
interactions evolved, where the lack of aromatic/basic residues may have been 
compensated by acidic residues plus metal ions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac032
PMCID: PMC8892947
PMID: 35137196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


628. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac031. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac031.

Pairs of Mutually Compensatory Frameshifting Mutations Contribute to Protein 
Evolution.

Biba D(1), Klink G(2), Bazykin GA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Life Sciences, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 
Moscow, Russia.
(2)Institute for Information Transmission Problems of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences (Kharkevitch Institute), Moscow, Russia.

Insertions and deletions of lengths not divisible by 3 in protein-coding 
sequences cause frameshifts that usually induce premature stop codons and may 
carry a high fitness cost. However, this cost can be partially offset by a 
second compensatory indel restoring the reading frame. The role of such pairs of 
compensatory frameshifting mutations (pCFMs) in evolution has not been studied 
systematically. Here, we use whole-genome alignments of protein-coding genes of 
100 vertebrate species, and of 122 insect species, studying the prevalence of 
pCFMs in their divergence. We detect a total of 624 candidate pCFM genes; six of 
them pass stringent quality filtering, including three human genes: RAB36, 
ARHGAP6, and NCR3LG1. In some instances, amino acid substitutions closely 
predating or following pCFMs restored the biochemical similarity of the 
frameshifted segment to the ancestral amino acid sequence, possibly reducing or 
negating the fitness cost of the pCFM. Typically, however, the biochemical 
similarity of the frameshifted sequence to the ancestral one was not higher than 
the similarity of a random sequence of a protein-coding gene to its frameshifted 
version, indicating that pCFMs can uncover radically novel regions of protein 
space. In total, pCFMs represent an appreciable and previously overlooked source 
of novel variation in amino acid sequences.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac031
PMCID: PMC8935012
PMID: 35137193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


629. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac021. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac021.

Comprehensive Species Sampling and Sophisticated Algorithmic Approaches Refute 
the Monophyly of Arachnida.

Ballesteros JA(1), Santibáñez-López CE(1)(2), Baker CM(1)(3), Benavides LR(3), 
Cunha TJ(3)(4), Gainett G(1), Ontano AZ(1), Setton EVW(1), Arango CP(5), 
Gavish-Regev E(6), Harvey MS(7)(8), Wheeler WC(9), Hormiga G(10), Giribet G(3), 
Sharma PP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Western Connecticut State University, Danbury, CT, 
USA.
(3)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Museum of Comparative 
Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Panama City, Panama.
(5)Office for Research, Griffith University, Nathan, QLD, Australia.
(6)National Natural History Collections, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(7)Collections & Research, Western Australian Museum, Welshpool, WA, Australia.
(8)School of Biological Sciences, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, 
Australia.
(9)Division of Invertebrate Zoology, American Museum of Natural History, New 
York, NY, USA.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, George Washington University, Washington, 
DC, USA.

Deciphering the evolutionary relationships of Chelicerata (arachnids, horseshoe 
crabs, and allied taxa) has proven notoriously difficult, due to their ancient 
rapid radiation and the incidence of elevated evolutionary rates in several 
lineages. Although conflicting hypotheses prevail in morphological and molecular 
data sets alike, the monophyly of Arachnida is nearly universally accepted, 
despite historical lack of support in molecular data sets. Some 
phylotranscriptomic analyses have recovered arachnid monophyly, but these did 
not sample all living orders, whereas analyses including all orders have failed 
to recover Arachnida. To understand this conflict, we assembled a data set of 
506 high-quality genomes and transcriptomes, sampling all living orders of 
Chelicerata with high occupancy and rigorous approaches to orthology inference. 
Our analyses consistently recovered the nested placement of horseshoe crabs 
within a paraphyletic Arachnida. This result was insensitive to variation in 
evolutionary rates of genes, complexity of the substitution models, and 
alternative algorithmic approaches to species tree inference. Investigation of 
sources of systematic bias showed that genes and sites that recover arachnid 
monophyly are enriched in noise and exhibit low information content. To test the 
impact of morphological data, we generated a 514-taxon morphological data matrix 
of extant and fossil Chelicerata, analyzed in tandem with the molecular matrix. 
Combined analyses recovered the clade Merostomata (the marine orders Xiphosura, 
Eurypterida, and Chasmataspidida), but merostomates appeared nested within 
Arachnida. Our results suggest that morphological convergence resulting from 
adaptations to life in terrestrial habitats has driven the historical perception 
of arachnid monophyly, paralleling the history of numerous other invertebrate 
terrestrial groups.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac021
PMCID: PMC8845124
PMID: 35137183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


630. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac030. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac030.

Evolution of Amino Acid Propensities under Stability-Mediated Epistasis.

Youssef N(1), Susko E(2), Roger AJ(3), Bielawski JP(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, NS, Canada.
(4)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

Site-specific amino acid preferences are influenced by the genetic background of 
the protein. The preferences for resident amino acids are expected to, on 
average, increase over time because of replacements at other sites-a nonadaptive 
phenomenon referred to as the "evolutionary Stokes shift." Alternatively, 
decreases in resident amino acid propensity have recently been viewed as 
evidence of adaptations to external environmental changes. Using population 
genetics theory and thermodynamic stability constraints, we show that 
nonadaptive evolution can lead to both positive and negative shifts in 
propensities following the fixation of an amino acid, emphasizing that the 
detection of negative shifts is not conclusive evidence of adaptation. By 
examining propensity shifts from when an amino acid is first accepted at a site 
until it is subsequently replaced, we find that ≈50% of sites show a decrease in 
the propensity for the newly resident amino acid while the remaining sites show 
an increase. Furthermore, the distributions of the magnitudes of positive and 
negative shifts were comparable. Preferences were often conserved via a 
significant negative autocorrelation in propensity changes-increases in 
propensities often followed by decreases, and vice versa. Lastly, we explore the 
underlying mechanisms that lead propensities to fluctuate. We observe that 
stabilizing replacements increase the mutational tolerance at a site and in 
doing so decrease the propensity for the resident amino acid. In contrast, 
destabilizing substitutions result in more rugged fitness landscapes that tend 
to favor the resident amino acid. In summary, our results characterize 
propensity trajectories under nonadaptive stability-constrained evolution 
against which evidence of adaptations should be calibrated.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac030
PMCID: PMC8896634
PMID: 35134997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


631. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab366. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab366.

Genomic Signatures of Recent Adaptation in a Wild Bumblebee.

Colgan TJ(1), Arce AN(2), Gill RJ(2), Ramos Rodrigues A(2), Kanteh A(1), Duncan 
EJ(3), Li L(1), Chittka L(1), Wurm Y(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences, Queen Mary University of 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park, Ascot, 
United Kingdom.
(3)School of Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, United Kingdom.
(4)Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom.

Environmental changes threaten insect pollinators, creating risks for 
agriculture and ecosystem stability. Despite their importance, we know little 
about how wild insects respond to environmental pressures. To understand the 
genomic bases of adaptation in an ecologically important pollinator, we analyzed 
genomes of Bombus terrestris bumblebees collected across Great Britain. We 
reveal extensive genetic diversity within this population, and strong signatures 
of recent adaptation throughout the genome affecting key processes including 
neurobiology and wing development. We also discover unusual features of the 
genome, including a region containing 53 genes that lacks genetic diversity in 
many bee species, and a horizontal gene transfer from a Wolbachia bacteria. 
Overall, the genetic diversity we observe and how it is distributed throughout 
the genome and the population should support the resilience of this important 
pollinator species to ongoing and future selective pressures. Applying our 
approach to more species should help understand how they can differ in their 
adaptive potential, and to develop conservation strategies for those most at 
risk.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab366
PMCID: PMC8845123
PMID: 35134226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


632. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac029. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac029.

The Slowing Rate of CpG Depletion in SARS-CoV-2 Genomes Is Consistent with 
Adaptations to the Human Host.

Kumar A(1), Goyal N(2), Saranathan N(1), Dhamija S(3)(4), Saraswat S(1), Menon 
MB(1), Vivekanandan P(1).

Author information:
(1)Kusuma School of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
New Delhi, India.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New 
Delhi, India.
(3)CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India.
(4)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, India.

Depletion of CpG dinucleotides in severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) genomes has been linked to virus evolution, 
host-switching, virus replication, and innate immune responses. Temporal 
variations, if any, in the rate of CpG depletion during virus evolution in the 
host remain poorly understood. Here, we analyzed the CpG content of over 1.4 
million full-length SARS-CoV-2 genomes representing over 170 million documented 
infections during the first 17 months of the pandemic. Our findings suggest that 
the extent of CpG depletion in SARS-CoV-2 genomes is modest. Interestingly, the 
rate of CpG depletion is highest during early evolution in humans and it 
gradually tapers off, almost reaching an equilibrium; this is consistent with 
adaptations to the human host. Furthermore, within the coding regions, CpG 
depletion occurs predominantly at codon positions 2-3 and 3-1. Loss of ZAP 
(Zinc-finger antiviral protein)-binding motifs in SARS-CoV-2 genomes is 
primarily driven by the loss of the terminal CpG within the motifs. Nonetheless, 
majority of the CpG depletion in SARS-CoV-2 genomes occurs outside ZAP-binding 
motifs. SARS-CoV-2 genomes selectively lose CpGs-motifs from a U-rich context; 
this may help avoid immune recognition by TLR7. SARS-CoV-2 alpha-, beta-, and 
delta-variants of concern have reduced CpG content compared to sequences from 
the beginning of the pandemic. In sum, we provide evidence that the rate of CpG 
depletion in virus genomes is not uniform and it greatly varies over time and 
during adaptations to the host. This work highlights how temporal variations in 
selection pressures during virus adaption may impact the rate and the extent of 
CpG depletion in virus genomes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac029
PMCID: PMC8892944
PMID: 35134218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


633. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac026. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac026.

Phylotranscriptomics Resolves the Phylogeny of Pooideae and Uncovers Factors for 
Their Adaptive Evolution.

Zhang L(1), Zhu X(2), Zhao Y(1), Guo J(1), Zhang T(1), Huang W(3), Huang J(1), 
Hu Y(3), Huang CH(1), Ma H(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Ministry of Education Key 
Laboratory of Biodiversity Sciences and Ecological Engineering, Institute of 
Plant Biology, Institute of Biodiversity Sciences, School of Life Sciences, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, Xinyang Normal University, Xinyang, China.
(3)Department of Biology, Huck Institutes of Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania 
State University, University Park, PA, USA.

Adaptation to cool climates has occurred several times in different angiosperm 
groups. Among them, Pooideae, the largest grass subfamily with ∼3,900 species 
including wheat and barley, have successfully occupied many temperate regions 
and play a prominent role in temperate ecosystems. To investigate possible 
factors contributing to Pooideae adaptive evolution to cooling climates, we 
performed phylogenetic reconstruction using five gene sets (with 1,234 nuclear 
genes and their subsets) from 157 transcriptomes/genomes representing all 15 
tribes and 24 of 26 subtribes. Our phylogeny supports the monophyly of all 
tribes (except Diarrheneae) and all subtribes with at least two species, with 
strongly supported resolution of their relationships. Molecular dating suggests 
that Pooideae originated in the late Cretaceous, with subsequent divergences 
under cooling conditions first among many tribes from the early middle to late 
Eocene and again among genera in the middle Miocene and later periods. We 
identified a cluster of gene duplications (CGD5) shared by the core Pooideae 
(with 80% Pooideae species) near the Eocene-Oligocene transition, coinciding 
with the transition from closed to open habitat and an upshift of 
diversification rate. Molecular evolutionary analyses homologs of CBF for cold 
resistance uncovered tandem duplications during the core Pooideae history, 
dramatically increasing their copy number and possibly promoting adaptation to 
cold habitats. Moreover, duplication of AP1/FUL-like genes before the Pooideae 
origin might have facilitated the regulation of the vernalization pathway under 
cold environments. These and other results provide new insights into factors 
that likely have contributed to the successful adaptation of Pooideae members to 
temperate regions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac026
PMCID: PMC8844509
PMID: 35134207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


634. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac027. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac027.

Evolution of Gene Expression across Species and Specialized Zooids in 
Siphonophora.

Munro C(1), Zapata F(2), Howison M(3), Siebert S(4), Dunn CW(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, Providence, 
RI, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Research Improving People's Lives (RIPL), Providence, RI, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California Davis, 
Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.

Siphonophores are complex colonial animals, consisting of asexually produced 
bodies (zooids) that are functionally specialized for specific tasks, including 
feeding, swimming, and sexual reproduction. Though this extreme functional 
specialization has captivated biologists for generations, its genomic 
underpinnings remain unknown. We use RNA-seq to investigate gene expression 
patterns in five zooids and one specialized tissue across seven siphonophore 
species. Analyses of gene expression across species present several challenges, 
including identification of comparable expression changes on gene trees with 
complex histories of speciation, duplication, and loss. We examine gene 
expression within species, conduct classical analyses examining expression 
patterns between species, and introduce species branch filtering, which allows 
us to examine the evolution of expression across species in a phylogenetic 
framework. Within and across species, we identified hundreds of zooid-specific 
and species-specific genes, as well as a number of putative transcription 
factors showing differential expression in particular zooids and developmental 
stages. We found that gene expression patterns tended to be largely consistent 
in zooids with the same function across species, but also some large 
lineage-specific shifts in gene expression. Our findings show that patterns of 
gene expression have the potential to define zooids in colonial organisms. 
Traditional analyses of the evolution of gene expression focus on the tips of 
gene phylogenies, identifying large-scale expression patterns that are zooid or 
species variable. The new explicit phylogenetic approach we propose here focuses 
on branches (not tips) offering a deeper evolutionary perspective into specific 
changes in gene expression within zooids along all branches of the gene (and 
species) trees.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac027
PMCID: PMC8844502
PMID: 35134205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


635. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac025. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac025.

A2B-COVID: A Tool for Rapidly Evaluating Potential SARS-CoV-2 Transmission 
Events.

Illingworth CJR(1)(2)(3)(4), Hamilton WL(5)(6), Jackson C(2), Warne B(5)(6), 
Popay A(7), Meredith L(8), Hosmillo M(8), Jahun A(8), Fieldman T(5)(6), 
Routledge M(6)(9), Houldcroft CJ(5), Caller L(10), Caddy S(11), Yakovleva A(8), 
Hall G(8), Khokhar FA(8), Feltwell T(5), Pinckert ML(8), Georgana I(8), Chaudhry 
Y(8), Curran M(9), Parmar S(9), Sparkes D(6)(9), Rivett L(6)(9), Jones NK(6)(9), 
Sridhar S(5)(11)(12), Forrest S(10), Dymond T(6), Grainger K(6), Workman C(6), 
Gkrania-Klotsas E(6)(13)(14), Brown NM(6)(9), Weekes MP(5)(11), Baker S(5)(11), 
Peacock SJ(5)(12), Gouliouris T(5)(9), Goodfellow I(8), Angelis D(2)(15), Török 
ME(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Biostatistics Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Institut für Biologische Physik, Universität zu Köln, Köln, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Public Health England Field Epidemiology Unit, Cambridge Institute of Public 
Health, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Pathology, Division of Virology, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(9)Clinical Microbiology and Public Health Laboratory, Cambridge University 
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(10)Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Cambridge Institute for Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, 
Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(12)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(13)MRC Epidemiology Unit, University of Cambridge, Level 3 Institute of 
Metabolic Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(14)School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(15)Public Health England, National Infection Service, London, United Kingdom.

Identifying linked cases of infection is a critical component of the public 
health response to viral infectious diseases. In a clinical context, there is a 
need to make rapid assessments of whether cases of infection have arrived 
independently onto a ward, or are potentially linked via direct transmission. 
Viral genome sequence data are of great value in making these assessments, but 
are often not the only form of data available. Here, we describe A2B-COVID, a 
method for the rapid identification of potentially linked cases of COVID-19 
infection designed for clinical settings. Our method combines knowledge about 
infection dynamics, data describing the movements of individuals, and 
evolutionary analysis of genome sequences to assess whether data collected from 
cases of infection are consistent or inconsistent with linkage via direct 
transmission. A retrospective analysis of data from two wards at Cambridge 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust during the first wave of the pandemic 
showed qualitatively different patterns of linkage between cases on designated 
COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 wards. The subsequent real-time application of our 
method to data from the second epidemic wave highlights its value for monitoring 
cases of infection in a clinical context.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac025
PMCID: PMC8892943
PMID: 35106603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


636. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac028. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac028.

Ongoing Recombination in SARS-CoV-2 Revealed through Genealogical 
Reconstruction.

Ignatieva A(1), Hein J(2)(3), Jenkins PA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)The Alan Turing Institute, British Library, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, United 
Kingdom.

The evolutionary process of genetic recombination has the potential to rapidly 
change the properties of a viral pathogen, and its presence is a crucial factor 
to consider in the development of treatments and vaccines. It can also 
significantly affect the results of phylogenetic analyses and the inference of 
evolutionary rates. The detection of recombination from samples of sequencing 
data is a very challenging problem and is further complicated for SARS-CoV-2 by 
its relatively slow accumulation of genetic diversity. The extent to which 
recombination is ongoing for SARS-CoV-2 is not yet resolved. To address this, we 
use a parsimony-based method to reconstruct possible genealogical histories for 
samples of SARS-CoV-2 sequences, which enables us to pinpoint specific 
recombination events that could have generated the data. We propose a 
statistical framework for disentangling the effects of recurrent mutation from 
recombination in the history of a sample, and hence provide a way of estimating 
the probability that ongoing recombination is present. We apply this to samples 
of sequencing data collected in England and South Africa and find evidence of 
ongoing recombination.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac028
PMCID: PMC8841603
PMID: 35106601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


637. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac023. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac023.

Molecular Evolution across Mouse Spermatogenesis.

Kopania EEK(1), Larson EL(2), Callahan C(1), Keeble S(1), Good JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Denver, Denver, CO, USA.

Genes involved in spermatogenesis tend to evolve rapidly, but we lack a clear 
understanding of how protein sequences and patterns of gene expression evolve 
across this complex developmental process. We used fluorescence-activated cell 
sorting (FACS) to generate expression data for early (meiotic) and late 
(postmeiotic) cell types across 13 inbred strains of mice (Mus) spanning ∼7 My 
of evolution. We used these comparative developmental data to investigate the 
evolution of lineage-specific expression, protein-coding sequences, and 
expression levels. We found increased lineage specificity and more rapid 
protein-coding and expression divergence during late spermatogenesis, suggesting 
that signatures of rapid testis molecular evolution are punctuated across sperm 
development. Despite strong overall developmental parallels in these components 
of molecular evolution, protein and expression divergences were only weakly 
correlated across genes. We detected more rapid protein evolution on the X 
chromosome relative to the autosomes, whereas X-linked gene expression tended to 
be relatively more conserved likely reflecting chromosome-specific regulatory 
constraints. Using allele-specific FACS expression data from crosses between 
four strains, we found that the relative contributions of different regulatory 
mechanisms also differed between cell types. Genes showing cis-regulatory 
changes were more common late in spermatogenesis, and tended to be associated 
with larger differences in expression levels and greater expression divergence 
between species. In contrast, genes with trans-acting changes were more common 
early and tended to be more conserved across species. Our findings advance 
understanding of gene evolution across spermatogenesis and underscore the 
fundamental importance of developmental context in molecular evolutionary 
studies.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac023
PMCID: PMC8844503
PMID: 35099536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


638. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac019. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac019.

Novel Classes and Evolutionary Turnover of Histone H2B Variants in the Mammalian 
Germline.

Raman P(1), Rominger MC(1)(2), Young JM(1), Molaro A(3), Tsukiyama T(1), Malik 
HS(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(2)Whitman College, Walla Walla, WA, USA.
(3)Genetics, Reproduction and Development (GReD) Institute, CNRS UMR 6293, 
INSERM U1103, Université Clermont Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA, USA.

Histones and their posttranslational modifications facilitate diverse chromatin 
functions in eukaryotes. Core histones (H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) package genomes 
after DNA replication. In contrast, variant histones promote specialized 
chromatin functions, including DNA repair, genome stability, and epigenetic 
inheritance. Previous studies have identified only a few H2B variants in 
animals; their roles and evolutionary origins remain largely unknown. Here, 
using phylogenomic analyses, we reveal the presence of five H2B variants broadly 
present in mammalian genomes. Three of these variants have been previously 
described: H2B.1, H2B.L (also called subH2B), and H2B.W. In addition, we 
identify and describe two new variants: H2B.K and H2B.N. Four of these variants 
originated in mammals, whereas H2B.K arose prior to the last common ancestor of 
bony vertebrates. We find that though H2B variants are subject to high gene 
turnover, most are broadly retained in mammals, including humans. Despite an 
overall signature of purifying selection, H2B variants evolve more rapidly than 
core H2B with considerable divergence in sequence and length. All five H2B 
variants are expressed in the germline. H2B.K and H2B.N are predominantly 
expressed in oocytes, an atypical expression site for mammalian histone 
variants. Our findings suggest that H2B variants likely encode potentially 
redundant but vital functions via unusual chromatin packaging or nonchromatin 
functions in mammalian germline cells. Our discovery of novel histone variants 
highlights the advantages of comprehensive phylogenomic analyses and provides 
unique opportunities to study how innovations in chromatin function evolve.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac019
PMCID: PMC8857922
PMID: 35099534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


639. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac024. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac024.

Deleterious Mutations Accumulate Faster in Allopolyploid Than Diploid Cotton 
(Gossypium) and Unequally between Subgenomes.

Conover JL(1), Wendel JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA, USA.

Whole-genome duplication (polyploidization) is among the most dramatic 
mutational processes in nature, so understanding how natural selection differs 
in polyploids relative to diploids is an important goal. Population genetics 
theory predicts that recessive deleterious mutations accumulate faster in 
allopolyploids than diploids due to the masking effect of redundant gene copies, 
but this prediction is hitherto unconfirmed. Here, we use the cotton genus 
(Gossypium), which contains seven allopolyploids derived from a single 
polyploidization event 1-2 Million years ago, to investigate deleterious 
mutation accumulation. We use two methods of identifying deleterious mutations 
at the nucleotide and amino acid level, along with whole-genome resequencing of 
43 individuals spanning six allopolyploid species and their two diploid 
progenitors, to demonstrate that deleterious mutations accumulate faster in 
allopolyploids than in their diploid progenitors. We find that, unlike what 
would be expected under models of demographic changes alone, strongly 
deleterious mutations show the biggest difference between ploidy levels, and 
this effect diminishes for moderately and mildly deleterious mutations. We 
further show that the proportion of nonsynonymous mutations that are deleterious 
differs between the two coresident subgenomes in the allopolyploids, suggesting 
that homoeologous masking acts unequally between subgenomes. Our results provide 
a genome-wide perspective on classic notions of the significance of gene 
duplication that likely are broadly applicable to allopolyploids, with 
implications for our understanding of the evolutionary fate of deleterious 
mutations. Finally, we note that some measures of selection (e.g., dN/dS, πN/πS) 
may be biased when species of different ploidy levels are compared.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac024
PMCID: PMC8841602
PMID: 35099532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


640. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab357. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab357.

MBE Emerging Classics 2022.

Rowe H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab357
PMCID: PMC8795901
PMID: 35088081


641. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac020. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac020.

A Peroxide-Responding sRNA Evolved from a Peroxidase mRNA.

Krieger MC(1)(2), Dutcher HA(1)(3), Ashford AJ(1)(4), Raghavan R(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Portland State University, Portland, OR, USA.
(2)Department of Restorative Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Oregon Health and 
Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Genetics and Center for Genomic Science Innovation, University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas 
at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA.

Small RNAs (sRNAs) are important gene regulators in bacteria, but it is unclear 
how new sRNAs originate and become part of regulatory networks that coordinate 
bacterial response to environmental stimuli. Using a covariance modeling-based 
approach, we analyzed the presence of hundreds of sRNAs in more than a thousand 
genomes across Enterobacterales, a bacterial order with a confluence of factors 
that allows robust genome-scale sRNA analyses: several well-studied organisms 
with fairly conserved genome structures, an established phylogeny, and 
substantial nucleotide diversity within a narrow evolutionary space. We 
discovered that a majority of sRNAs arose recently, and uncovered protein-coding 
genes as a potential source from which new sRNAs arise. A detailed investigation 
of the emergence of OxyS, a peroxide-responding sRNA, revealed that it evolved 
from a fragment of a peroxidase messenger RNA. Importantly, although it replaced 
the ancestral peroxidase, OxyS continues to be part of the ancestral 
peroxide-response regulon, indicating that an sRNA that arises from a 
protein-coding gene would inherently be part of the parental protein's 
regulatory network. This new insight provides a fresh framework for 
understanding sRNA origin and regulatory integration in bacteria.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac020
PMCID: PMC8825220
PMID: 35084505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


642. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac015. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac015.

Approximate Bayesian Computation Untangles Signatures of Contemporary and 
Historical Hybridization between Two Endangered Species.

Dittberner H(1), Tellier A(2), de Meaux J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Life Science Systems, Technical University of Munich, Freising, 
Germany.

Contemporary gene flow, when resumed after a period of isolation, can have 
crucial consequences for endangered species, as it can both increase the supply 
of adaptive alleles and erode local adaptation. Determining the history of gene 
flow and thus the importance of contemporary hybridization, however, is 
notoriously difficult. Here, we focus on two endangered plant species, Arabis 
nemorensis and A. sagittata, which hybridize naturally in a sympatric population 
located on the banks of the Rhine. Using reduced genome sequencing, we 
determined the phylogeography of the two taxa but report only a unique sympatric 
population. Molecular variation in chloroplast DNA indicated that A. sagittata 
is the principal receiver of gene flow. Applying classical D-statistics and its 
derivatives to whole-genome data of 35 accessions, we detect gene flow not only 
in the sympatric population but also among allopatric populations. Using an 
Approximate Bayesian computation approach, we identify the model that best 
describes the history of gene flow between these taxa. This model shows that low 
levels of gene flow have persisted long after speciation. Around 10 000 years 
ago, gene flow stopped and a period of complete isolation began. Eventually, a 
hotspot of contemporary hybridization was formed in the unique sympatric 
population. Occasional sympatry may have helped protect these lineages from 
extinction in spite of their extremely low diversity.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac015
PMCID: PMC8826969
PMID: 35084503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


643. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac018. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac018.

The Role of DNA Methylation in Genome Defense in Cnidaria and Other 
Invertebrates.

Ying H(1), Hayward DC(1), Klimovich A(2), Bosch TCG(2)(3), Baldassarre L(4), 
Neeman T(5), Forêt S(1)(6), Huttley G(1), Reitzel AM(7), Fraune S(4), Ball 
EE(1)(6), Miller DJ(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(2)Zoological Institute, Christian Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Collaborative Research Center for the Origin and Function of Metaorganisms, 
Christian Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Department of Zoology and Organismal Interactions, Heinrich-Heine-University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Biological Data Institute, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(6)ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, Australian National 
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Carolina, Charlotte, 
NC, USA.
(8)ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, James Cook University, 
Townsville, QLD, Australia.
(9)College of Public Health, Medical and Veterinary Sciences, James Cook 
University, Townsville, QLD, Australia.
(10)Centre for Tropical Bioinformatics and Molecular Biology, James Cook 
University, Townsville, QLD, Australia.
(11)Marine Climate Change Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, 
Onna, Japan.

Considerable attention has recently been focused on the potential involvement of 
DNA methylation in regulating gene expression in cnidarians. Much of this work 
has been centered on corals, in the context of changes in methylation perhaps 
facilitating adaptation to higher seawater temperatures and other stressful 
conditions. Although first proposed more than 30 years ago, the possibility that 
DNA methylation systems function in protecting animal genomes against the 
harmful effects of transposon activity has largely been ignored since that time. 
Here, we show that transposons are specifically targeted by the DNA methylation 
system in cnidarians, and that the youngest transposons (i.e., those most likely 
to be active) are most highly methylated. Transposons in longer and highly 
active genes were preferentially methylated and, as transposons aged, 
methylation levels declined, reducing the potentially harmful side effects of 
CpG methylation. In Cnidaria and a range of other invertebrates, correlation 
between the overall extent of methylation and transposon content was strongly 
supported. Present transposon burden is the dominant factor in determining 
overall level of genomic methylation in a range of animals that diverged in or 
before the early Cambrian, suggesting that genome defense represents the 
ancestral role of CpG methylation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac018
PMCID: PMC8857917
PMID: 35084499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


644. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac017. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac017.

Placing Ancient DNA Sequences into Reference Phylogenies.

Martiniano R(1)(2), De Sanctis B(1)(3), Hallast P(4)(5), Durbin R(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, 
Tartu, Estonia.
(5)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Joint phylogenetic analysis of ancient DNA (aDNA) with modern phylogenies is 
hampered by low sequence coverage and post-mortem deamination, often resulting 
in overconservative or incorrect assignment. We provide a new efficient 
likelihood-based workflow, pathPhynder, that takes advantage of all the 
polymorphic sites in the target sequence. This effectively evaluates the number 
of ancestral and derived alleles present on each branch and reports the most 
likely placement of an ancient sample in the phylogeny and a haplogroup 
assignment, together with alternatives and supporting evidence. To illustrate 
the application of pathPhynder, we show improved Y chromosome assignments for 
published aDNA sequences, using a newly compiled Y variation data set (120,908 
markers from 2,014 samples) that significantly enhances Y haplogroup assignment 
for low coverage samples. We apply the method to all published male aDNA samples 
from Africa, giving new insights into ancient migrations and the relationships 
between ancient and modern populations. The same software can be used to place 
samples with large amounts of missing data into other large non-recombining 
phylogenies such as the mitochondrial tree.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac017
PMCID: PMC8857924
PMID: 35084493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


645. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msac003. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac003.

Erratum to: Adaptive Introgression Facilitates Adaptation to High Latitudes in 
European Aspen (Populus Tremula L.).

Rendón-Anaya M, Wilson J, Sveinsson S, Fedorkov A, Cottrell J, Bailey MES, 
Ruņǵis D, Lexer C, Jansson S, Robinson KM, Street NR, Ingvarsson PK.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5034-5050.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac003
PMCID: PMC8790632
PMID: 35080245


646. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac001. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac001.

What Happened before Losses of Photosynthesis in Cryptophyte Algae?

Suzuki S(1), Matsuzaki R(1)(2), Yamaguchi H(1), Kawachi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Biodiversity Division, National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.

In many lineages of algae and land plants, photosynthesis was lost multiple 
times independently. Comparative analyses of photosynthetic and secondary 
nonphotosynthetic relatives have revealed the essential functions of plastids, 
beyond photosynthesis. However, evolutionary triggers and processes that drive 
the loss of photosynthesis remain unknown. Cryptophytes are microalgae with 
complex plastids derived from a red alga. They include several secondary 
nonphotosynthetic species with closely related photosynthetic taxa. In this 
study, we found that a cryptophyte, Cryptomonas borealis, is in a stage just 
prior to the loss of photosynthesis. Cryptomonas borealis was mixotrophic, 
possessed photosynthetic activity, and grew independent of light. The plastid 
genome of C. borealis had distinct features, including increases of group II 
introns with mobility, frequent genome rearrangements, incomplete loss of 
inverted repeats, and abundant small/medium/large-sized structural variants. 
These features provide insight into the evolutionary process leading to the loss 
of photosynthesis.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac001
PMCID: PMC8829904
PMID: 35079797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


647. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab372. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab372.

Kingdom-Wide Analysis of Fungal Protein-Coding and tRNA Genes Reveals Conserved 
Patterns of Adaptive Evolution.

Wint R(1)(2), Salamov A(2), Grigoriev IV(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Unit, Quantitative and Systems Biology Program, 
University of California Merced, Merced, CA, USA.
(2)U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA USA.

Protein-coding genes evolved codon usage bias due to the combined but uneven 
effects of adaptive and nonadaptive influences. Studies in model fungi agree on 
codon usage bias as an adaptation for fine-tuning gene expression levels; 
however, such knowledge is lacking for most other fungi. Our comparative 
genomics analysis of over 450 species supports codon usage and transfer RNAs 
(tRNAs) as coadapted for translation speed and this is most likely a realization 
of convergent evolution. Rather than drift, phylogenetic reconstruction inferred 
adaptive radiation as the best explanation for the variation of interspecific 
codon usage bias. Although the phylogenetic signals for individual codon and 
tRNAs frequencies are lower than expected by genetic drift, we found remarkable 
conservation of highly expressed genes being codon optimized for translation by 
the most abundant tRNAs, especially by inosine-modified tRNAs. As an 
application, we present a sequence-to-expression neural network that uses codons 
to reliably predict highly expressed transcripts. The kingdom Fungi, with over a 
million species, includes many key players in various ecosystems and good 
targets for biotechnology. Collectively, our results have implications for 
better understanding the evolutionary success of fungi, as well as informing the 
biosynthetic manipulation of fungal genes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab372
PMCID: PMC8826637
PMID: 35060603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


648. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac012. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac012.

Phylotranscriptomics Reveals Discordance in the Phylogeny of Hawaiian Drosophila 
and Scaptomyza (Diptera: Drosophilidae).

Church SH(1)(2), Extavour CG(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA, USA.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA.

Island radiations present natural laboratories for studying the evolutionary 
process. The Hawaiian Drosophilidae are one such radiation, with nearly 600 
described species and substantial morphological and ecological diversification. 
These species are largely divided into a few major clades, but the relationship 
between clades remains uncertain. Here, we present new assembled transcriptomes 
from 12 species across these clades, and use these transcriptomes to resolve the 
base of the evolutionary radiation. We recover a new hypothesis for the 
relationship between clades, and demonstrate its support over previously 
published hypotheses. We then use the evolutionary radiation to explore dynamics 
of concordance in phylogenetic support, by analyzing the gene and site 
concordance factors for every possible topological combination of major groups. 
We show that high bootstrap values mask low evolutionary concordance, and we 
demonstrate that the most likely topology is distinct from the topology with the 
highest support across gene trees and from the topology with highest support 
across sites. We then combine all previously published genetic data for the 
group to estimate a time-calibrated tree for over 300 species of drosophilids. 
Finally, we digitize dozens of published Hawaiian Drosophilidae descriptions, 
and use this to pinpoint probable evolutionary shifts in reproductive ecology as 
well as body, wing, and egg size. We show that by examining the entire landscape 
of tree and trait space, we can gain a more complete understanding of how 
evolutionary dynamics play out across an island radiation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac012
PMCID: PMC8892949
PMID: 35048974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


649. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac016. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac016.

Genome Resequencing Reveals Rapid, Repeated Evolution in the Colorado Potato 
Beetle.

Pélissié B(1), Chen YH(2), Cohen ZP(1), Crossley MS(1), Hawthorne DJ(3), Izzo 
V(2), Schoville SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Department of Plant and Soil Science, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, 
USA.
(3)Department of Entomology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.

Insecticide resistance and rapid pest evolution threatens food security and the 
development of sustainable agricultural practices, yet the evolutionary 
mechanisms that allow pests to rapidly adapt to control tactics remains unclear. 
Here, we examine how a global super-pest, the Colorado potato beetle (CPB), 
Leptinotarsa decemlineata, rapidly evolves resistance to insecticides. Using 
whole-genome resequencing and transcriptomic data focused on its ancestral and 
pest range in North America, we assess evidence for three, nonmutually exclusive 
models of rapid evolution: pervasive selection on novel mutations, rapid 
regulatory evolution, and repeated selection on standing genetic variation. 
Population genomic analysis demonstrates that CPB is geographically structured, 
even among recently established pest populations. Pest populations exhibit 
similar levels of nucleotide diversity, relative to nonpest populations, and 
show evidence of recent expansion. Genome scans provide clear signatures of 
repeated adaptation across CPB populations, with especially strong evidence of 
selection on insecticide resistance genes in different populations. Analyses of 
gene expression show that constitutive upregulation of candidate insecticide 
resistance genes drives distinctive population patterns. CPB evolves insecticide 
resistance repeatedly across agricultural regions, leveraging similar genetic 
pathways but different genes, demonstrating a polygenic trait architecture for 
insecticide resistance that can evolve from standing genetic variation. Despite 
expectations, we do not find support for strong selection on novel mutations, or 
rapid evolution from selection on regulatory genes. These results suggest that 
integrated pest management practices must mitigate the evolution of polygenic 
resistance phenotypes among local pest populations, in order to maintain the 
efficacy and sustainability of novel control techniques.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac016
PMCID: PMC8826761
PMID: 35044459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


650. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac014. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac014.

The Genetic Origin of Daunians and the Pan-Mediterranean Southern Italian Iron 
Age Context.

Aneli S(1), Saupe T(2), Montinaro F(2)(3), Solnik A(4), Molinaro L(2), Scaggion 
C(5), Carrara N(6), Raveane A(7), Kivisild T(2)(8), Metspalu M(2), Scheib 
CL(2)(9), Pagani L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Padua, Padova, Italy.
(2)Estonian Biocentre, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(3)Department of Biology-Genetics, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(4)Core Facility, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(5)Department of Geosciences, University of Padua, Padova, Italy.
(6)Anthropology Museum, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(7)Laboratory of Hematology-Oncology, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy.
(8)Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)St John's College, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The geographical location and shape of Apulia, a narrow land stretching out in 
the sea at the South of Italy, made this region a Mediterranean crossroads 
connecting Western Europe and the Balkans. Such movements culminated at the 
beginning of the Iron Age with the Iapygian civilization which consisted of 
three cultures: Peucetians, Messapians, and Daunians. Among them, the Daunians 
left a peculiar cultural heritage, with one-of-a-kind stelae and pottery, but, 
despite the extensive archaeological literature, their origin has been lost to 
time. In order to shed light on this and to provide a genetic picture of Iron 
Age Southern Italy, we collected and sequenced human remains from three 
archaeological sites geographically located in Northern Apulia (the area 
historically inhabited by Daunians) and radiocarbon dated between 1157 and 275 
calBCE. We find that Iron Age Apulian samples are still distant from the genetic 
variability of modern-day Apulians, they show a degree of genetic heterogeneity 
comparable with the cosmopolitan Republican and Imperial Roman civilization, 
even though a few kilometers and centuries separate them, and they are well 
inserted into the Iron Age Pan-Mediterranean genetic landscape. Our study 
provides for the first time a window on the genetic make-up of pre-Roman Apulia, 
whose increasing connectivity within the Mediterranean landscape, would have 
contributed to laying the foundation for modern genetic variability. In this 
light, the genetic profile of Daunians may be compatible with an at least 
partial autochthonous origin, with plausible contributions from the Balkan 
peninsula.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac014
PMCID: PMC8826970
PMID: 35038748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


651. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac010. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac010.

A Thermodynamic Atlas of Proteomes Reveals Energetic Innovation across the Tree 
of Life.

Chin AF(1), Wrabl JO(1), Hilser VJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)T.C. Jenkins Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.

Protein stability is a fundamental molecular property enabling organisms to 
adapt to their biological niches. How this is facilitated and whether there are 
kingdom specific or more general universal strategies are unknown. A principal 
obstacle to addressing this issue is that the vast majority of proteins lack 
annotation, specifically thermodynamic annotation, beyond the amino acid and 
chromosome information derived from genome sequencing. To address this gap and 
facilitate future investigation into large-scale patterns of protein stability 
and dynamics within and between organisms, we applied a unique ensemble-based 
thermodynamic characterization of protein folds to a substantial portion of 
extant sequenced genomes. Using this approach, we compiled a database resource 
focused on the position-specific variation in protein stability. Interrogation 
of the database reveals: 1) domains of life exhibit distinguishing thermodynamic 
features, with eukaryotes particularly different from both archaea and bacteria; 
2) the optimal growth temperature of an organism is proportional to the average 
apolar enthalpy of its proteome; 3) intrinsic disorder content is also 
proportional to the apolar enthalpy (but unexpectedly not the predicted 
stability at 25 °C); and 4) secondary structure and global stability information 
of individual proteins is extractable. We hypothesize that wider access to 
residue-specific thermodynamic information of proteomes will result in deeper 
understanding of mechanisms driving functional adaptation and protein evolution. 
Our database is free for download at 
https://afc-science.github.io/thermo-env-atlas/ (last accessed January 18, 
2022).

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac010
PMCID: PMC8896757
PMID: 35038744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


652. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac013. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac013.

The Emergence of SARS-CoV-2 Variants of Concern Is Driven by Acceleration of the 
Substitution Rate.

Tay JH(1), Porter AF(1), Wirth W(1), Duchene S(1).

Author information:
(1)Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

The ongoing SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has seen an unprecedented amount of rapidly 
generated genome data. These data have revealed the emergence of lineages with 
mutations associated to transmissibility and antigenicity, known as variants of 
concern (VOCs). A striking aspect of VOCs is that many of them involve an 
unusually large number of defining mutations. Current phylogenetic estimates of 
the substitution rate of SARS-CoV-2 suggest that its genome accrues around two 
mutations per month. However, VOCs can have 15 or more defining mutations and it 
is hypothesized that they emerged over the course of a few months, implying that 
they must have evolved faster for a period of time. We analyzed genome sequence 
data from the GISAID database to assess whether the emergence of VOCs can be 
attributed to changes in the substitution rate of the virus and whether this 
pattern can be detected at a phylogenetic level using genome data. We fit a 
range of molecular clock models and assessed their statistical performance. Our 
analyses indicate that the emergence of VOCs is driven by an episodic increase 
in the substitution rate of around 4-fold the background phylogenetic rate 
estimate that may have lasted several weeks or months. These results underscore 
the importance of monitoring the molecular evolution of the virus as a means of 
understanding the circumstances under which VOCs may emerge.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac013
PMCID: PMC8807201
PMID: 35038741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


653. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac011. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac011.

Long-Read Genome Sequencing Provides Molecular Insights into Scavenging and 
Societal Complexity in Spotted Hyena Crocuta crocuta.

Shao Y(1), Wang XB(2)(3), Zhang ML(4), Liu Y(5), Wang S(1), Zhang BL(1), Yang 
MM(1), Yang MH(5), Jia T(5), Pu TC(5), Lu Y(5), Liu H(5), Xu Z(5), Li B(5), Liu 
N(5), Onsongo VM(1), Wu DD(1), Zhang CL(5), Ruan J(2), Li Y(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)Agricultural Genomics Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Shenzhen, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, Guangxi University, Nanning, China.
(4)Department of Acute Infectious Diseases Control and Prevention, Yunnan 
Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Kunming, China.
(5)Beijing Zoo, Beijing, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resource in 
Yunnan, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, China.

The spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta) is a large and unique terrestrial carnivore. 
It is a particularly fascinating species due to its distinct phenotypic traits, 
especially its complex social structure and scavenging lifestyle, with 
associated high dietary exposure to microbial pathogens. However, the underlying 
molecular mechanisms related to these phenotypes remain elusive. Here, we 
sequenced and assembled a high-quality long-read genome of the spotted hyena, 
with a contig N50 length of ∼13.75 Mb. Based on comparative genomics, 
immunoglobulin family members (e.g., IGKV4-1) showed significant adaptive 
duplications in the spotted hyena and striped hyena. Furthermore, immune-related 
genes (e.g., CD8A, LAG3, and TLR3) experienced species-specific positive 
selection in the spotted hyena lineage. These results suggest that immune 
tolerance between the spotted hyena and closely related striped hyena has 
undergone adaptive divergence to cope with prolonged dietary exposure to 
microbial pathogens from scavenging. Furthermore, we provided the potential 
genetic insights underlying social complexity, hinting at social behavior and 
cognition. Specifically, the RECNE-associated genes (e.g., UGP2 and ACTR2) in 
the spotted hyena genome are involved in regulation of social communication. 
Taken together, our genomic analyses provide molecular insights into the 
scavenging lifestyle and societal complexity of spotted hyenas.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac011
PMCID: PMC8890499
PMID: 35038730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


654. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac009. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac009.

Purifying Selection Determines the Short-Term Time Dependency of Evolutionary 
Rates in SARS-CoV-2 and pH1N1 Influenza.

Ghafari M(1), du Plessis L(1), Raghwani J(1), Bhatt S(2), Xu B(3), Pybus OG(1), 
Katzourakis A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Jameel Institute for 
Disease and Emergency Analytics, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Earth System Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.

High-throughput sequencing enables rapid genome sequencing during infectious 
disease outbreaks and provides an opportunity to quantify the evolutionary 
dynamics of pathogens in near real-time. One difficulty of undertaking 
evolutionary analyses over short timescales is the dependency of the inferred 
evolutionary parameters on the timespan of observation. Crucially, there are an 
increasing number of molecular clock analyses using external evolutionary rate 
priors to infer evolutionary parameters. However, it is not clear which rate 
prior is appropriate for a given time window of observation due to the 
time-dependent nature of evolutionary rate estimates. Here, we characterize the 
molecular evolutionary dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 and 2009 pandemic H1N1 (pH1N1) 
influenza during the first 12 months of their respective pandemics. We use 
Bayesian phylogenetic methods to estimate the dates of emergence, evolutionary 
rates, and growth rates of SARS-CoV-2 and pH1N1 over time and investigate how 
varying sampling window and data set sizes affect the accuracy of parameter 
estimation. We further use a generalized McDonald-Kreitman test to estimate the 
number of segregating nonneutral sites over time. We find that the inferred 
evolutionary parameters for both pandemics are time dependent, and that the 
inferred rates of SARS-CoV-2 and pH1N1 decline by ∼50% and ∼100%, respectively, 
over the course of 1 year. After at least 4 months since the start of sequence 
sampling, inferred growth rates and emergence dates remain relatively stable and 
can be inferred reliably using a logistic growth coalescent model. We show that 
the time dependency of the mean substitution rate is due to elevated 
substitution rates at terminal branches which are 2-4 times higher than those of 
internal branches for both viruses. The elevated rate at terminal branches is 
strongly correlated with an increasing number of segregating nonneutral sites, 
demonstrating the role of purifying selection in generating the time dependency 
of evolutionary parameters during pandemics.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac009
PMCID: PMC8826518
PMID: 35038728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


655. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab363. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab363.

Corrigendum to: Antibiotic Treatment Regimes as a Driver of the Global 
Population Dynamics of a Major Gonorrhea Lineage.

Osnes MN, van Dorp L, Brynildsrud OB, Alfsnes K, Schneiders T, Templeton KE, 
Yahara K, Balloux F, Caugant DA, Eldholm V.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1249-1261.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab363
PMCID: PMC8757490
PMID: 35024865


656. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac002. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac002.

Duplication and Specialization of NUDX1 in Rosaceae Led to Geraniol Production 
in Rose Petals.

Conart C(1), Saclier N(2), Foucher F(3), Goubert C(4), Rius-Bony A(1), Paramita 
SN(1), Moja S(1), Thouroude T(3), Douady C(2)(5), Sun P(6), Nairaud B(1), 
Saint-Marcoux D(1), Bahut M(7), Jeauffre J(3), Hibrand Saint-Oyant L(3), 
Schuurink RC(6), Magnard JL(1), Boachon B(1), Dudareva N(8)(9), Baudino S(1), 
Caissard JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Lyon, Université Saint-Etienne, CNRS, UMR 5079, Laboratoire de 
Biotechnologies Végétales appliquées aux Plantes Aromatiques et Médicinales, 
Saint-Etienne, France.
(2)Université Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, UMR 5023, ENTPE, 
Laboratoire d'Ecologie des Hydrosystèmes Naturels et Anthropisés, Villeurbanne, 
France.
(3)Univ Angers, Institut Agro, INRAE, IRHS, SFR QUASAV, Angers, France.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University Genome Center, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(5)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France.
(6)Green Life Sciences Research Cluster, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Univ Angers, SFR QUASAV, Angers, France.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
(9)Purdue Center for Plant Biology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.

Nudix hydrolases are conserved enzymes ubiquitously present in all kingdoms of 
life. Recent research revealed that several Nudix hydrolases are involved in 
terpenoid metabolism in plants. In modern roses, RhNUDX1 is responsible for 
formation of geraniol, a major compound of rose scent. Nevertheless, this 
compound is produced by monoterpene synthases in many geraniol-producing plants. 
As a consequence, this raised the question about the origin of RhNUDX1 function 
and the NUDX1 gene evolution in Rosaceae, in wild roses or/and during the 
domestication process. Here, we showed that three distinct clades of NUDX1 
emerged in the Rosoidae subfamily (Nudx1-1 to Nudx1-3 clades), and two subclades 
evolved in the Rosa genus (Nudx1-1a and Nudx1-1b subclades). We also showed that 
the Nudx1-1b subclade was more ancient than the Nudx1-1a subclade, and that the 
NUDX1-1a gene emerged by a trans-duplication of the more ancient NUDX1-1b gene. 
After the transposition, NUDX1-1a was cis-duplicated, leading to a gene dosage 
effect on the production of geraniol in different species. Furthermore, the 
NUDX1-1a appearance was accompanied by the evolution of its promoter, most 
likely from a Copia retrotransposon origin, leading to its petal-specific 
expression. Thus, our data strongly suggest that the unique function of NUDX1-1a 
in geraniol formation was evolved naturally in the genus Rosa before 
domestication.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac002
PMCID: PMC8857926
PMID: 35022771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


657. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac008. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac008.

Demographic History and Natural Selection Shape Patterns of Deleterious Mutation 
Load and Barriers to Introgression across Populus Genome.

Liu S(1), Zhang L(1), Sang Y(1), Lai Q(1), Zhang X(1), Jia C(1), Long Z(1), Wu 
J(1), Ma T(1), Mao K(1), Street NR(2), Ingvarsson PK(3), Liu J(1), Wang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of Ministry of 
Education, College of Life Science & State Key Lab of Hydraulics and Mountain 
River Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Plant Physiology, Umeå Plant Science Centre, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden.
(3)Department of Plant Biology, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Hybridization and resulting introgression are important processes shaping the 
tree of life and appear to be far more common than previously thought. However, 
how the genome evolution was shaped by various genetic and evolutionary forces 
after hybridization remains unresolved. Here we used whole-genome resequencing 
data of 227 individuals from multiple widespread Populus species to characterize 
their contemporary patterns of hybridization and to quantify genomic signatures 
of past introgression. We observe a high frequency of contemporary hybridization 
and confirm that multiple previously ambiguous species are in fact F1 hybrids. 
Seven species were identified, which experienced different demographic histories 
that resulted in strikingly varied efficacy of selection and burdens of 
deleterious mutations. Frequent past introgression has been found to be a 
pervasive feature throughout the speciation of these Populus species. The 
retained introgressed regions, more generally, tend to contain reduced genetic 
load and to be located in regions of high recombination. We also find that in 
pairs of species with substantial differences in effective population size, 
introgressed regions are inferred to have undergone selective sweeps at greater 
than expected frequencies in the species with lower effective population size, 
suggesting that introgression likely have higher potential to provide beneficial 
variation for species with small populations. Our results, therefore, illustrate 
that demography and recombination have interplayed with both positive and 
negative selection in determining the genomic evolution after hybridization.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac008
PMCID: PMC8826634
PMID: 35022759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


658. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac006. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac006.

Evolution of Brain-Expressed Biogenic Amine Receptors into Olfactory Trace 
Amine-Associated Receptors.

Guo L(1)(2)(3)(4), Dai W(1)(2), Xu Z(1)(2)(5)(6), Liang Q(7), Miller ET(8), Li 
S(1)(2), Gao X(5)(6), Baldwin MW(7), Chai R(3)(4)(6), Li Q(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain Science, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, School of 
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation 
and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics, Department of Otolaryngology Head and 
Neck Surgery, Zhongda Hospital, School of Life Sciences and Technology, Jiangsu 
Province High-Tech Key Laboratory for Bio-Medical Research, Southeast 
University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Co-Innovation Center of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, 
China.
(5)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Affiliated Drum Tower 
Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Jiangsu Provincial Key Medical 
Discipline (Laboratory), Nanjing, China.
(6)Research Institute of Otolaryngology, Nanjing, China.
(7)Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, Evolution of Sensory Systems Research 
Group, Seewiesen, Germany.
(8)Macaulay Library, Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(9)Shanghai Research Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Intelligence, 
Shanghai, China.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 May 3;39(5):

The family of trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs) is distantly related to G 
protein-coupled biogenic aminergic receptors. TAARs are found in the brain as 
well as in the olfactory epithelium where they detect biogenic amines. However, 
the functional relationship of receptors from distinct TAAR subfamilies and in 
different species is still uncertain. Here, we perform a thorough phylogenetic 
analysis of 702 TAAR-like (TARL) and TAAR sequences from 48 species. We show 
that a clade of Tarl genes has greatly expanded in lampreys, whereas the other 
Tarl clade consists of only one or two orthologs in jawed vertebrates and is 
lost in amniotes. We also identify two small clades of Taar genes in sharks 
related to the remaining Taar genes in bony vertebrates, which are divided into 
four major clades. We further identify ligands for 61 orphan TARLs and TAARs 
from sea lamprey, shark, ray-finned fishes, and mammals, as well as novel 
ligands for two 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor 4 orthologs, a serotonin receptor 
subtype closely related to TAARs. Our results reveal a pattern of functional 
convergence and segregation: TARLs from sea lamprey and bony vertebrate 
olfactory TAARs underwent independent expansions to function as chemosensory 
receptors, whereas TARLs from jawed vertebrates retain ancestral response 
profiles and may have similar functions to TAAR1 in the brain. Overall, our data 
provide a comprehensive understanding of the evolution and ligand recognition 
profiles of TAARs and TARLs.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac006
PMCID: PMC8890504
PMID: 35021231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


659. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msac007. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac007.

A Collaborative Classroom Investigation of the Evolution of SABATH 
Methyltransferase Substrate Preference Shifts over 120 My of Flowering Plant 
History.

Dubs NM(1), Davis BR(1), de Brito V(1), Colebrook KC(1), Tiefel IJ(1), Nakayama 
MB(1), Huang R(1), Ledvina AE(1), Hack SJ(1), Inkelaar B(1), Martins TR(1), 
Aartila SM(1), Albritton KS(1), Almuhanna S(1), Arnoldi RJ(1), Austin CK(1), 
Battle AC(1), Begeman GR(1), Bickings CM(1), Bradfield JT(1), Branch EC(1), 
Conti EP(1), Cooley B(1), Dotson NM(1), Evans CJ(1), Fries AS(1), Gilbert IG(1), 
Hillier WD(1), Huang P(1), Hyde KW(1), Jevtovic F(1), Johnson MC(1), Keeler 
JL(1), Lam A(1), Leach KM(1), Livsey JD(1), Lo JT(1), Loney KR(1), Martin NW(1), 
Mazahem AS(1), Mokris AN(1), Nichols DM(1), Ojha R(1), Okorafor NN(1), Paris 
JR(1), Reboucas TF(1), Sant'Anna PB(1), Seitz MR(1), Seymour NR(1), Slaski 
LK(1), Stemaly SO(1), Ulrich BR(1), Van Meter EN(1), Young ML(1), Barkman TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, 
MI, USA.

Next-generation sequencing has resulted in an explosion of available data, much 
of which remains unstudied in terms of biochemical function; yet, experimental 
characterization of these sequences has the potential to provide unprecedented 
insight into the evolution of enzyme activity. One way to make inroads into the 
experimental study of the voluminous data available is to engage students by 
integrating teaching and research in a college classroom such that eventually 
hundreds or thousands of enzymes may be characterized. In this study, we 
capitalize on this potential to focus on SABATH methyltransferase enzymes that 
have been shown to methylate the important plant hormone, salicylic acid (SA), 
to form methyl salicylate. We analyze data from 76 enzymes of flowering plant 
species in 23 orders and 41 families to investigate how widely conserved 
substrate preference is for SA methyltransferase orthologs. We find a high 
degree of conservation of substrate preference for SA over the structurally 
similar metabolite, benzoic acid, with recent switches that appear to be 
associated with gene duplication and at least three cases of functional 
compensation by paralogous enzymes. The presence of Met in active site position 
150 is a useful predictor of SA methylation preference in SABATH 
methyltransferases but enzymes with other residues in the homologous position 
show the same substrate preference. Although our dense and systematic sampling 
of SABATH enzymes across angiosperms has revealed novel insights, this is merely 
the "tip of the iceberg" since thousands of sequences remain uncharacterized in 
this enzyme family alone.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac007
PMCID: PMC8890502
PMID: 35021222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


660. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac005. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac005.

An Improved Codon Modeling Approach for Accurate Estimation of the Mutation 
Bias.

Latrille T(1)(2), Lartillot N(1).

Author information:
(1)CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive UMR, Université de Lyon, 
Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France.
(2)École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, 
Lyon, France.

Phylogenetic codon models are routinely used to characterize selective regimes 
in coding sequences. Their parametric design, however, is still a matter of 
debate, in particular concerning the question of how to account for differing 
nucleotide frequencies and substitution rates. This problem relates to the fact 
that nucleotide composition in protein-coding sequences is the result of the 
interactions between mutation and selection. In particular, because of the 
structure of the genetic code, the nucleotide composition differs between the 
three coding positions, with the third position showing a more extreme 
composition. Yet, phylogenetic codon models do not correctly capture this 
phenomenon and instead predict that the nucleotide composition should be the 
same for all three positions. Alternatively, some models allow for different 
nucleotide rates at the three positions, an approach conflating the effects of 
mutation and selection on nucleotide composition. In practice, it results in 
inaccurate estimation of the strength of selection. Conceptually, the problem 
comes from the fact that phylogenetic codon models do not correctly capture the 
fixation bias acting against the mutational pressure at the mutation-selection 
equilibrium. To address this problem and to more accurately identify mutation 
rates and selection strength, we present an improved codon modeling approach 
where the fixation rate is not seen as a scalar, but as a tensor. This approach 
gives an accurate representation of how mutation and selection oppose each other 
at equilibrium and yields a reliable estimate of the mutational process, while 
disentangling the mean fixation probabilities prevailing in different mutational 
directions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac005
PMCID: PMC8831783
PMID: 35021218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


661. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab365. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab365.

SpeciesRax: A Tool for Maximum Likelihood Species Tree Inference from Gene 
Family Trees under Duplication, Transfer, and Loss.

Morel B(1)(2), Schade P(2), Lutteropp S(1), Williams TA(3), Szöllősi 
GJ(4)(5)(6), Stamatakis A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
Karlsruhe, Germany.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
(4)ELTE-MTA "Lendület" Evolutionary Genomics Research Group, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Department of Biological Physics, Eötvös University, Budapest, Hungary.
(6)Institute of Evolution, Centre for Ecological Research, Budapest, Hungary.

Species tree inference from gene family trees is becoming increasingly popular 
because it can account for discordance between the species tree and the 
corresponding gene family trees. In particular, methods that can account for 
multiple-copy gene families exhibit potential to leverage paralogy as 
informative signal. At present, there does not exist any widely adopted 
inference method for this purpose. Here, we present SpeciesRax, the first 
maximum likelihood method that can infer a rooted species tree from a set of 
gene family trees and can account for gene duplication, loss, and transfer 
events. By explicitly modeling events by which gene trees can depart from the 
species tree, SpeciesRax leverages the phylogenetic rooting signal in gene 
trees. SpeciesRax infers species tree branch lengths in units of expected 
substitutions per site and branch support values via paralogy-aware quartets 
extracted from the gene family trees. Using both empirical and simulated data 
sets we show that SpeciesRax is at least as accurate as the best competing 
methods while being one order of magnitude faster on large data sets at the same 
time. We used SpeciesRax to infer a biologically plausible rooted phylogeny of 
the vertebrates comprising 188 species from 31,612 gene families in 1 h using 40 
cores. SpeciesRax is available under GNU GPL at 
https://github.com/BenoitMorel/GeneRax and on BioConda.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab365
PMCID: PMC8826479
PMID: 35021210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


662. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msac004. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msac004.

FishmiRNA: An Evolutionarily Supported MicroRNA Annotation and Expression 
Database for Ray-Finned Fishes.

Desvignes T(1), Bardou P(2), Montfort J(3), Sydes J(1), Guyomar C(2), George 
S(4), Postlethwait JH(1), Bobe J(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.
(2)Sigenae, GenPhySE, Université de Toulouse, INRAE, ENVT, Castanet Tolosan, 
France.
(3)INRAE, LPGP, Rennes, France.
(4)MGX-Montpellier GenomiX, University of Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM, 
Montpellier, France.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important post-transcriptional regulators of gene 
expression involved in countless biological processes and are widely studied 
across metazoans. Although miRNA research continues to grow, the large community 
of fish miRNA researchers lacks exhaustive resources consistent among species. 
To fill this gap, we developed FishmiRNA, an evolutionarily supported miRNA 
annotation and expression database for ray-finned fishes: www.fishmirna.org. The 
self-explanatory database contains detailed, manually curated miRNA annotations 
with orthology relationships rigorously established by sequence similarity and 
conserved syntenies, and expression data provided for each detected mature 
miRNA. In just few clicks, users can download the annotation and expression 
database in several convenient formats either in its entirety or a subset. 
Simple filters and Blast search options also permit the simultaneous exploration 
and visual comparison of expression data for up to any ten mature miRNAs across 
species and organs. FishmiRNA was specifically designed for ease of use to reach 
a wide audience.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msac004
PMCID: PMC8826519
PMID: 35020925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


663. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msab373. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab373.

Dynamic RNA Fitness Landscapes of a Group I Ribozyme during Changes to the 
Experimental Environment.

Peri G(1), Gibard C(2), Shults NH(2), Crossin K(2), Hayden EJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Graduate Programs, Boise State University, Boise, ID, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biological Science, Boise State University, Boise, ID, USA.

Fitness landscapes of protein and RNA molecules can be studied experimentally 
using high-throughput techniques to measure the functional effects of numerous 
combinations of mutations. The rugged topography of these molecular fitness 
landscapes is important for understanding and predicting natural and 
experimental evolution. Mutational effects are also dependent upon environmental 
conditions, but the effects of environmental changes on fitness landscapes 
remains poorly understood. Here, we investigate the changes to the fitness 
landscape of a catalytic RNA molecule while changing a single environmental 
variable that is critical for RNA structure and function. Using high-throughput 
sequencing of in vitro selections, we mapped a fitness landscape of the Azoarcus 
group I ribozyme under eight different concentrations of magnesium ions (1-48 mM 
MgCl2). The data revealed the magnesium dependence of 16,384 mutational 
neighbors, and from this, we investigated the magnesium induced changes to the 
topography of the fitness landscape. The results showed that increasing 
magnesium concentration improved the relative fitness of sequences at higher 
mutational distances while also reducing the ruggedness of the mutational 
trajectories on the landscape. As a result, as magnesium concentration was 
increased, simulated populations evolved toward higher fitness faster. 
Curve-fitting of the magnesium dependence of individual ribozymes demonstrated 
that deep sequencing of in vitro reactions can be used to evaluate the 
structural stability of thousands of sequences in parallel. Overall, the results 
highlight how environmental changes that stabilize structures can also alter the 
ruggedness of fitness landscapes and alter evolutionary processes.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab373
PMCID: PMC8890501
PMID: 35020916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


664. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab337. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab337.

Corrigendum to: Drosophila Evolution over Space and Time (DEST): a New 
Population Genomics Resource.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5782-5805.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab337
PMCID: PMC8757487
PMID: 35020905


665. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab371. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab371.

Placental Mammals Acquired Functional Sequences in NRK for Regulating the 
CK2-PTEN-AKT Pathway and Placental Cell Proliferation.

Lestari B(1), Naito S(1), Endo A(2), Nishihara H(1), Kato A(1), Watanabe E(1), 
Denda K(1), Komada M(1)(2), Fukushima T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science and Technology, School of Life Science and 
Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Cell Biology Center, Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, Yokohama, Japan.

The molecular evolution processes underlying the acquisition of the placenta in 
eutherian ancestors are not fully understood. Mouse NCK-interacting kinase 
(NIK)-related kinase (NRK) is expressed highly in the placenta and plays a role 
in preventing placental hyperplasia. Here, we show the molecular evolution of 
NRK, which confers its function for inhibiting placental cell proliferation. 
Comparative genome analysis identified NRK orthologs across vertebrates, which 
share the kinase and citron homology (CNH) domains. Evolutionary analysis 
revealed that NRK underwent extensive amino acid substitutions in the ancestor 
of placental mammals and has been since conserved. Biochemical analysis of mouse 
NRK revealed that the CNH domain binds to phospholipids, and a region in NRK 
binds to and inhibits casein kinase-2 (CK2), which we named the CK2-inhibitory 
region (CIR). Cell culture experiments suggest the following: 1) Mouse NRK is 
localized at the plasma membrane via the CNH domain, where the CIR inhibits CK2. 
2) This mitigates CK2-dependent phosphorylation and inhibition of PTEN and 3) 
leads to the inhibition of AKT signaling and cell proliferation. Nrk deficiency 
increased phosphorylation levels of PTEN and AKT in mouse placenta, supporting 
our hypothesis. Unlike mouse NRK, chicken NRK did not bind to phospholipids and 
CK2, decrease phosphorylation of AKT, or inhibit cell proliferation. Both the 
CNH domain and CIR have evolved under purifying selection in placental mammals. 
Taken together, our study suggests that placental mammals acquired the 
phospholipid-binding CNH domain and CIR in NRK for regulating the CK2-PTEN-AKT 
pathway and placental cell proliferation.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab371
PMCID: PMC8857918
PMID: 34999820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


666. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab370. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab370.

Horizontally Acquired Cellulases Assist the Expansion of Dietary Range in 
Pristionchus Nematodes.

Han Z(1), Sieriebriennikov B(1), Susoy V(1), Lo WS(1), Igreja C(1), Dong C(1), 
Berasategui A(2), Witte H(1), Sommer RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department for Integrative Evolutionary Biology, Max-Planck Institute for 
Biology, Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) enables the acquisition of novel traits via 
non-Mendelian inheritance of genetic material. HGT plays a prominent role in the 
evolution of prokaryotes, whereas in animals, HGT is rare and its functional 
significance is often uncertain. Here, we investigate horizontally acquired 
cellulase genes in the free-living nematode model organism Pristionchus 
pacificus. We show that these cellulase genes 1) are likely of eukaryotic 
origin, 2) are expressed, 3) have protein products that are secreted and 
functional, and 4) result in endo-cellulase activity. Using CRISPR/Cas9, we 
generated an octuple cellulase mutant, which lacks all eight cellulase genes and 
cellulase activity altogether. Nonetheless, this cellulase-null mutant is viable 
and therefore allows a detailed analysis of a gene family that was horizontally 
acquired. We show that the octuple cellulase mutant has associated fitness costs 
with reduced fecundity and slower developmental speed. Furthermore, by using 
various Escherichia coli K-12 strains as a model for cellulosic biofilms, we 
demonstrate that cellulases facilitate the procurement of nutrients from 
bacterial biofilms. Together, our analysis of cellulases in Pristionchus 
provides comprehensive evidence from biochemistry, genetics, and phylogeny, 
which supports the integration of horizontally acquired genes into the complex 
life history strategy of this soil nematode.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab370
PMCID: PMC8826503
PMID: 34978575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


667. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab367. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab367.

Synergism, Bifunctionality, and the Evolution of a Gradual Sensory Trade-off in 
Hummingbird Taste Receptors.

Cockburn G(1), Ko MC(1), Sadanandan KR(1), Miller ET(2), Nakagita T(3)(4), Monte 
A(5), Cho S(6), Roura E(6), Toda Y(3), Baldwin MW(1).

Author information:
(1)Evolution of Sensory Systems Research Group, Max Planck Institute for 
Ornithology, Seewiesen, Germany.
(2)Macaulay Library, Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Agricultural Chemistry, School of Agriculture, Meiji 
University, Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Proteo-Science Center, Ehime University, Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan.
(5)Department of Behavioral Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, 
Seewiesen, Germany.
(6)Centre for Nutrition and Food Sciences, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture 
and Food Innovation, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia.

Sensory receptor evolution can imply trade-offs between ligands, but the extent 
to which such trade-offs occur and the underlying processes shaping their 
evolution is not well understood. For example, hummingbirds have repurposed 
their ancestral savory receptor (T1R1-T1R3) to detect sugars, but the impact of 
this sensory shift on amino acid perception is unclear. Here, we use functional 
and behavioral approaches to show that the hummingbird T1R1-T1R3 acts as a 
bifunctional receptor responsive to both sugars and amino acids. Our comparative 
analyses reveal substantial functional diversity across the hummingbird 
radiation and suggest an evolutionary timeline for T1R1-T1R3 retuning. Finally, 
we identify a novel form of synergism between sugars and amino acids in 
vertebrate taste receptors. This work uncovers an unexplored axis of sensory 
diversity, suggesting new ways in which nectar chemistry and pollinator 
preferences can coevolve.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab367
PMCID: PMC8826506
PMID: 34978567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


668. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab369. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab369.

Positive Selection and Enhancer Evolution Shaped Lifespan and Body Mass in Great 
Apes.

Tejada-Martinez D(1)(2), Avelar RA(2), Lopes I(2), Zhang B(3), Novoa G(4), de 
Magalhães JP(2), Trizzino M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Integrative Genomics of Ageing Group, Institute of Ageing and Chronic 
Disease, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Healthy Ageing, and Research Department of Genetics, Evolution 
and Environment, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Structure of Macromolecules, Centro Nacional de 
Biotecnología-CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Within primates, the great apes are outliers both in terms of body size and 
lifespan, since they include the largest and longest-lived species in the order. 
Yet, the molecular bases underlying such features are poorly understood. Here, 
we leveraged an integrated approach to investigate multiple sources of molecular 
variation across primates, focusing on over 10,000 genes, including 
approximately 1,500 previously associated with lifespan, and additional 
approximately 9,000 for which an association with longevity has never been 
suggested. We analyzed dN/dS rates, positive selection, gene expression 
(RNA-seq), and gene regulation (ChIP-seq). By analyzing the correlation between 
dN/dS, maximum lifespan, and body mass, we identified 276 genes whose rate of 
evolution positively correlates with maximum lifespan in primates. Further, we 
identified five genes, important for tumor suppression, adaptive immunity, 
metastasis, and inflammation, under positive selection exclusively in the great 
ape lineage. RNA-seq data, generated from the liver of six species representing 
all the primate lineages, revealed that 8% of approximately 1,500 genes 
previously associated with longevity are differentially expressed in apes 
relative to other primates. Importantly, by integrating RNA-seq with ChIP-seq 
for H3K27ac (which marks active enhancers), we show that the differentially 
expressed longevity genes are significantly more likely than expected to be 
located near a novel "ape-specific" enhancer. Moreover, these particular 
ape-specific enhancers are enriched for young transposable elements, and 
specifically SINE-Vntr-Alus. In summary, we demonstrate that multiple 
evolutionary forces have contributed to the evolution of lifespan and body size 
in primates.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab369
PMCID: PMC8837823
PMID: 34971383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


669. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab368. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab368.

A Population Genomic Assessment of Three Decades of Evolution in a Natural 
Drosophila Population.

Lange JD(1), Bastide H(1), Lack JB(1), Pool JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

Population genetics seeks to illuminate the forces shaping genetic variation, 
often based on a single snapshot of genomic variation. However, utilizing 
multiple sampling times to study changes in allele frequencies can help clarify 
the relative roles of neutral and non-neutral forces on short time scales. This 
study compares whole-genome sequence variation of recently collected natural 
population samples of Drosophila melanogaster against a collection made 
approximately 35 years prior from the same locality-encompassing roughly 500 
generations of evolution. The allele frequency changes between these time points 
would suggest a relatively small local effective population size on the order of 
10,000, significantly smaller than the global effective population size of the 
species. Some loci display stronger allele frequency changes than would be 
expected anywhere in the genome under neutrality-most notably the tandem 
paralogs Cyp6a17 and Cyp6a23, which are impacted by structural variation 
associated with resistance to pyrethroid insecticides. We find a genome-wide 
excess of outliers for high genetic differentiation between old and new samples, 
but a larger number of adaptation targets may have affected SNP-level 
differentiation versus window differentiation. We also find evidence for 
strengthening latitudinal allele frequency clines: northern-associated alleles 
have increased in frequency by an average of nearly 2.5% at SNPs previously 
identified as clinal outliers, but no such pattern is observed at random SNPs. 
This project underscores the scientific potential of using multiple sampling 
time points to investigate how evolution operates in natural populations, by 
quantifying how genetic variation has changed over ecologically relevant 
timescales.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab368
PMCID: PMC8826484
PMID: 34971382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


670. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab351. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab351.

Ancient Human Genomes and Environmental DNA from the Cement Attaching 
2,000-Year-Old Head Lice Nits.

Pedersen MW(1), Antunes C(2), De Cahsan B(1), Moreno-Mayar JV(1), Sikora M(1), 
Vinner L(1), Mann D(3), Klimov PB(4)(5), Black S(6), Michieli CT(7), Braig 
HR(4)(8), Perotti MA(2).

Author information:
(1)GLOBE Institute, Faculty of Health and Medical Science, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Section, School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom.
(3)Oxford University Museum of Natural History, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, Wales, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, 
Museum of Zoology, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Geography and Environmental Science, Wager Building, University 
of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom.
(7)Instituto de Investigaciones Arqueológicas y Museo "Prof. Mariano Gambier", 
Universidad Nacional de San Juan, San Juan, Argentina.
(8)Institute and Museum of Natural Sciences, Faculty of Exact, Physical and 
Natural Sciences, National University of San Juan, San Juan, Argentina.

Over the past few decades, there has been a growing demand for genome analysis 
of ancient human remains. Destructive sampling is increasingly difficult to 
obtain for ethical reasons, and standard methods of breaking the skull to access 
the petrous bone or sampling remaining teeth are often forbidden for curatorial 
reasons. However, most ancient humans carried head lice and their eggs abound in 
historical hair specimens. Here we show that host DNA is protected by the cement 
that glues head lice nits to the hair of ancient Argentinian mummies, 
1,500-2,000 years old. The genetic affinities deciphered from genome-wide 
analyses of this DNA inform that this population migrated from north-west 
Amazonia to the Andes of central-west Argentina; a result confirmed using the 
mitochondria of the host lice. The cement preserves ancient environmental DNA of 
the skin, including the earliest recorded case of Merkel cell polyomavirus. We 
found that the percentage of human DNA obtained from nit cement equals human DNA 
obtained from the tooth, yield 2-fold compared with a petrous bone, and 4-fold 
to a bloodmeal of adult lice a millennium younger. In metric studies of sheaths, 
the length of the cement negatively correlates with the age of the specimens, 
whereas hair linear distance between nit and scalp informs about the 
environmental conditions at the time before death. Ectoparasitic lice sheaths 
can offer an alternative, nondestructive source of high-quality ancient DNA from 
a variety of host taxa where bones and teeth are not available and reveal 
complementary details of their history.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab351
PMCID: PMC8829908
PMID: 34963129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


671. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab362. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab362.

Evolution of Olfactory Receptors Tuned to Mustard Oils in Herbivorous 
Drosophilidae.

Matsunaga T(1), Reisenman CE(1)(2), Goldman-Huertas B(1)(3), Brand P(4), Miao 
K(1), Suzuki HC(1), Verster KI(1), Ramírez SR(4), Whiteman NK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA.
(4)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California Davis, Davis, 
CA, USA.

The diversity of herbivorous insects is attributed to their propensity to 
specialize on toxic plants. In an evolutionary twist, toxins betray the identity 
of their bearers when herbivores coopt them as cues for host-plant finding, but 
the evolutionary mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are poorly understood. We 
focused on Scaptomyza flava, an herbivorous drosophilid specialized on 
isothiocyanate (ITC)-producing (Brassicales) plants, and identified Or67b 
paralogs that were triplicated as mustard-specific herbivory evolved. Using in 
vivo heterologous systems for the expression of olfactory receptors, we found 
that S. flava Or67bs, but not the homologs from microbe-feeding relatives, 
responded selectively to ITCs, each paralog detecting different ITC subsets. 
Consistent with this, S. flava was attracted to ITCs, as was Drosophila 
melanogaster expressing S. flava Or67b3 in the homologous Or67b olfactory 
circuit. ITCs were likely coopted as olfactory attractants through gene 
duplication and functional specialization (neofunctionalization and 
subfunctionalization) in S. flava, a recently derived herbivore.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab362
PMCID: PMC8826531
PMID: 34963012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


672. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab364. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab364.

Phylogeography Reveals Association between Swine Trade and the Spread of Porcine 
Epidemic Diarrhea Virus in China and across the World.

He WT(1), Bollen N(2), Xu Y(3), Zhao J(1), Dellicour S(2)(4), Yan Z(1), Gong 
W(5), Zhang C(1), Zhang L(1), Lu M(1), Lai A(6), Suchard MA(7)(8)(9), Ji X(10), 
Tu C(5), Lemey P(2), Baele G(2), Su S(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Engineering Laboratory of Animal Immunology, Institute of Immunology, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, 
Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)China Animal Disease Control Center, Ministry of Agriculture, Beijing, China.
(4)Spatial Epidemiology Lab (SpELL), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, 
Belgium.
(5)Key Laboratory of Jilin Province for Zoonosis Prevention and Control, 
Institute of Military Veterinary, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, 
Changchun, Jilin, China.
(6)School of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, Kentucky State 
University, Frankfort, KY, USA.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Fielding School of Public Health, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Biomathematics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Mathematics, School of Science & Engineering, Tulane 
University, New Orleans, LA, USA.

The ongoing SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome)-CoV (coronavirus)-2 
pandemic has exposed major gaps in our knowledge on the origin, ecology, 
evolution, and spread of animal coronaviruses. Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus 
(PEDV) is a member of the genus Alphacoronavirus in the family Coronaviridae 
that may have originated from bats and leads to significant hazards and 
widespread epidemics in the swine population. The role of local and global trade 
of live swine and swine-related products in disseminating PEDV remains unclear, 
especially in developing countries with complex swine production systems. Here, 
we undertake an in-depth phylogeographic analysis of PEDV sequence data 
(including 247 newly sequenced samples) and employ an extension of this 
inference framework that enables formally testing the contribution of a range of 
predictor variables to the geographic spread of PEDV. Within China, the 
provinces of Guangdong and Henan were identified as primary hubs for the spread 
of PEDV, for which we estimate live swine trade to play a very important role. 
On a global scale, the United States and China maintain the highest number of 
PEDV lineages. We estimate that, after an initial introduction out of China, the 
United States acted as an important source of PEDV introductions into Japan, 
Korea, China, and Mexico. Live swine trade also explains the dispersal of PEDV 
on a global scale. Given the increasingly global trade of live swine, our 
findings have important implications for designing prevention and containment 
measures to combat a wide range of livestock coronaviruses.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab364
PMCID: PMC8826572
PMID: 34951645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


673. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab361. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab361.

Genetic Connections and Convergent Evolution of Tropical Indigenous Peoples in 
Asia.

Deng L(1), Pan Y(2), Wang Y(2)(3), Chen H(2), Yuan K(2), Chen S(4), Lu D(2), Lu 
Y(1), Mokhtar SS(5), Rahman TA(6), Hoh BP(2)(7), Xu S(1)(2)(3)(4)(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Center for Evolutionary Biology, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and Development, School of Life 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and 
Health, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Liver Surgery and Transplantation Liver Cancer Institute, 
Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, School of 
Life Sciences, Human Phenome Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Institute of Medical Molecular Biotechnology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti 
Teknologi MARA, Sungai Buloh Campus, Sungai Buloh, Selangor, Malaysia.
(6)Clinical Pathology Diagnostic Centre Research Laboratory, Faculty of 
Medicine, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Sungai Buloh Campus, Sungai Buloh, 
Selangor, Malaysia.
(7)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, UCSI University, Cheras, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(8)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
China.
(9)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Phylogenomics and Comparative Genomics, School of 
Life Sciences, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, China.
(10)Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(11)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Tropical indigenous peoples in Asia (TIA) attract much attention for their 
unique appearance, whereas their genetic history and adaptive evolution remain 
mysteries. We conducted a comprehensive study to characterize the genetic 
distinction and connection of broad geographical TIAs. Despite the diverse 
genetic makeup and large interarea genetic differentiation between the TIA 
groups, we identified a basal Asian ancestry (bASN) specifically shared by these 
populations. The bASN ancestry was relatively enriched in ancient Asian human 
genomes dated as early as ∼50,000 years before the present and diminished in 
more recent history. Notably, the bASN ancestry is unlikely to be derived from 
archaic hominins. Instead, we suggest it may be better modeled as a survived 
lineage of the initial peopling of Asia. Shared adaptations inherited from the 
ancient Asian ancestry were detected among the TIA groups (e.g., LIMS1 for hair 
morphology, and COL24A1 for bone formation), and they are enriched in 
neurological functions either at an identical locus (e.g., NKAIN3), or different 
loci in an identical gene (e.g., TENM4). The bASN ancestry could also have 
formed the substrate of the genetic architecture of the dark pigmentation 
observed in the TIA peoples. We hypothesize that phenotypic convergence of the 
dark pigmentation in TIAs could have resulted from parallel (e.g., DDB1/DAK) or 
genetic convergence driven by admixture (e.g., MTHFD1 and RAD18), new mutations 
(e.g., STK11), or notably purifying selection (e.g., MC1R). Our results provide 
new insights into the initial peopling of Asia and an advanced understanding of 
the phenotypic convergence of the TIA peoples.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab361
PMCID: PMC8826522
PMID: 34940850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


674. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab360. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab360.

Tracing the Origin and Evolutionary Fate of Recent Gene Retrocopies in Natural 
Populations of the House Mouse.

Zhang W(1), Tautz D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Biology, Plön, Germany.

Although the contribution of retrogenes to the evolution of genes and genomes 
has long been recognized, the evolutionary patterns of very recently derived 
retrocopies that are still polymorphic within natural populations have not been 
much studied so far. We use here a set of 2,025 such retrocopies in nine house 
mouse populations from three subspecies (Mus musculus domesticus, M. m. 
musculus, and M. m. castaneus) to trace their origin and evolutionary fate. We 
find that ancient house-keeping genes are significantly more likely to generate 
retrocopies than younger genes and that the propensity to generate a retrocopy 
depends on its level of expression in the germline. Although most retrocopies 
are detrimental and quickly purged, we focus here on the subset that appears to 
be neutral or even adaptive. We show that retrocopies from X-chromosomal 
parental genes have a higher likelihood to reach elevated frequencies in the 
populations, confirming the notion of adaptive effects for "out-of-X" 
retrogenes. Also, retrocopies in intergenic regions are more likely to reach 
higher population frequencies than those in introns of genes, implying a more 
detrimental effect when they land within transcribed regions. For a small subset 
of retrocopies, we find signatures of positive selection, indicating they were 
involved in a recent adaptation process. We show that the population-specific 
distribution pattern of retrocopies is phylogenetically informative and can be 
used to infer population history with a better resolution than with SNP markers.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab360
PMCID: PMC8826619
PMID: 34940842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


675. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab336. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab336.

Patterns of piRNA Regulation in Drosophila Revealed through Transposable Element 
Clade Inference.

Said I(1), McGurk MP(1), Clark AG(1), Barbash DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 
USA.

Transposable elements (TEs) are self-replicating "genetic parasites" ubiquitous 
to eukaryotic genomes. In addition to conflict between TEs and their host 
genomes, TEs of the same family are in competition with each other. They compete 
for the same genomic niches while experiencing the same regime of copy-number 
selection. This suggests that competition among TEs may favor the emergence of 
new variants that can outcompete their ancestral forms. To investigate the 
sequence evolution of TEs, we developed a method to infer clades: collections of 
TEs that share SNP variants and represent distinct TE family lineages. We 
applied this method to a panel of 85 Drosophila melanogaster genomes and found 
that the genetic variation of several TE families shows significant population 
structure that arises from the population-specific expansions of single clades. 
We used population genetic theory to classify these clades into younger versus 
older clades and found that younger clades are associated with a greater 
abundance of sense and antisense piRNAs per copy than older ones. Further, we 
find that the abundance of younger, but not older clades, is positively 
correlated with antisense piRNA production, suggesting a general pattern where 
hosts preferentially produce antisense piRNAs from recently active TE variants. 
Together these findings suggest a pattern whereby new TE variants arise by 
mutation and then increase in copy number, followed by the host producing 
antisense piRNAs that may be used to silence these emerging variants.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab336
PMCID: PMC8788220
PMID: 34921315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


676. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab359. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab359.

Ancient Demographics Determine the Effectiveness of Genetic Purging in 
Endangered Lizards.

Xie HX(1)(2), Liang XX(1), Chen ZQ(3), Li WM(1)(2), Mi CR(1)(2), Li M(1), Wu 
ZJ(4)(5), Zhou XM(1), Du WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Novogene Bioinformatics Institute, Beijing, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Ecology of Rare and Endangered Species and Environmental 
Protection, Ministry of Education, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China.
(5)Guangxi Key Laboratory of Rare and Endangered Animal Ecology, College of Life 
Science, Guangxi Normal University, Guilin, China.

The purging of deleterious alleles has been hypothesized to mitigate inbreeding 
depression, but its effectiveness in endangered species remains debatable. To 
understand how deleterious alleles are purged during population contractions, we 
analyzed genomes of the endangered Chinese crocodile lizard (Shinisaurus 
crocodilurus), which is the only surviving species of its family and currently 
isolated into small populations. Population genomic analyses revealed four 
genetically distinct conservation units and sharp declines in both effective 
population size and genetic diversity. By comparing the relative genetic load 
across populations and conducting genomic simulations, we discovered that 
seriously deleterious alleles were effectively purged during population 
contractions in this relict species, although inbreeding generally enhanced the 
genetic burden. However, despite with the initial purging, our simulations also 
predicted that seriously deleterious alleles will gradually accumulate under 
prolonged bottlenecking. Therefore, we emphasize the importance of maintaining a 
minimum population capacity and increasing the functional genetic diversity in 
conservation efforts to preserve populations of the crocodile lizard and other 
endangered species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab359
PMCID: PMC8788223
PMID: 34919713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


677. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab358. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab358.

Chromosomal Fusions Facilitate Adaptation to Divergent Environments in 
Threespine Stickleback.

Liu Z(1), Roesti M(1), Marques D(2)(3)(4), Hiltbrunner M(1), Saladin V(1), 
Peichel CL(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolutionary Ecology, Institute of Ecology and Evolution, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Division of Aquatic Ecology and Evolution, Institute of Ecology and 
Evolution, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Fish Ecology and Evolution, Centre for Ecology, Evolution, and 
Biogeochemistry, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology 
(EAWAG), Kastanienbaum, Switzerland.
(4)Natural History Museum Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Chromosomal fusions are hypothesized to facilitate adaptation to divergent 
environments, both by bringing together previously unlinked adaptive alleles and 
by creating regions of low recombination that facilitate the linkage of adaptive 
alleles; but, there is little empirical evidence to support this hypothesis. 
Here, we address this knowledge gap by studying threespine stickleback 
(Gasterosteus aculeatus), in which ancestral marine fish have repeatedly adapted 
to freshwater across the northern hemisphere. By comparing the threespine and 
ninespine stickleback (Pungitius pungitius) genomes to a de novo assembly of the 
fourspine stickleback (Apeltes quadracus) and an outgroup species, we find two 
chromosomal fusion events involving the same chromosomes have occurred 
independently in the threespine and ninespine stickleback lineages. On the fused 
chromosomes in threespine stickleback, we find an enrichment of quantitative 
trait loci underlying traits that contribute to marine versus freshwater 
adaptation. By comparing whole-genome sequences of freshwater and marine 
threespine stickleback populations, we also find an enrichment of regions under 
divergent selection on these two fused chromosomes. There is elevated genetic 
diversity within regions under selection in the freshwater population, 
consistent with a simulation study showing that gene flow can increase diversity 
in genomic regions associated with local adaptation and our demographic models 
showing gene flow between the marine and freshwater populations. Integrating our 
results with previous studies, we propose that these fusions created regions of 
low recombination that enabled the formation of adaptative clusters, thereby 
facilitating freshwater adaptation in the face of recurrent gene flow between 
marine and freshwater threespine sticklebacks.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab358
PMCID: PMC8826639
PMID: 34908155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


678. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab324. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab324.

45S rDNA Repeats of Turtles and Crocodiles Harbor a Functional 5S rRNA Gene 
Specifically Expressed in Oocytes.

Davidian AG(1), Dyomin AG(2), Galkina SA(1), Makarova NE(3), Dmitriev SE(3), 
Gaginskaya ER(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological Faculty, Saint Petersburg State University, Saint Petersburg, 
Russia.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Technologies, Saratov State Medical University, Saratov, 
Russia.
(3)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, Moscow, Russia.

In most eukaryotic genomes, tandemly repeated copies of 5S rRNA genes are 
clustered outside the nucleolus organizer region (NOR), which normally encodes 
three other major rRNAs: 18S, 5.8S, and 28S. Our analysis of turtle rDNA 
sequences has revealed a 5S rDNA insertion into the NOR intergenic spacer in 
antisense orientation. The insertion (hereafter called NOR-5S rRNA gene) has a 
length of 119 bp and coexists with the canonical 5S rDNA clusters outside the 
NOR. Despite the ∼20% nucleotide difference between the two 5S gene sequences, 
their internal control regions for RNA polymerase III are similar. Using the 
turtle Trachemys scripta as a model species, we showed the NOR-5S rDNA specific 
expression in oocytes. This expression is concurrent with the NOR rDNA 
amplification during oocyte growth. We show that in vitellogenic oocytes, the 
NOR-5S rRNA prevails over the canonical 5S rRNA in the ribosomes, suggesting a 
role of modified ribosomes in oocyte-specific translation. The orders Testudines 
and Crocodilia seem to be the only taxa of vertebrates with such a peculiar rDNA 
organization. We speculate that the amplification of the 5S rRNA genes as a part 
of the NOR DNA during oogenesis provides a dosage balance between transcription 
of all the four ribosomal RNAs while producing a maternal pool of extra 
ribosomes. We further hypothesize that the NOR-5S rDNA insertion appeared in the 
Archelosauria clade during the Permian period and was lost later in the 
ancestors of Aves.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab324
PMCID: PMC8789306
PMID: 34905062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


679. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab331. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab331.

Noninsect-Based Diet Leads to Structural and Functional Changes of Acidic 
Chitinase in Carnivora.

Tabata E(1)(2), Itoigawa A(3), Koinuma T(1), Tayama H(1), Kashimura A(1), 
Sakaguchi M(1), Matoska V(4), Bauer PO(4)(5), Oyama F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Life Science, Kogakuin University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Research Fellow of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (PD), Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Primate Research Institute, 
Kyoto University, Aichi, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, 
Hematology and Immunology, Homolka Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Bioinova JSC, Prague, Czech Republic.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/ageing/afab186.

Acidic chitinase (Chia) digests the chitin of insects in the omnivorous stomach 
and the chitinase activity in carnivorous Chia is significantly lower than that 
of the omnivorous enzyme. However, mechanistic and evolutionary insights into 
the functional changes in Chia remain unclear. Here we show that a 
noninsect-based diet has caused structural and functional changes in Chia during 
the course of evolution in Carnivora. By creating mouse-dog chimeric Chia 
proteins and modifying the amino acid sequences, we revealed that F214L and 
A216G substitutions led to the dog enzyme activation. In 31 Carnivora, Chia was 
present as a pseudogene with stop codons in the open reading frame (ORF) region. 
Importantly, the Chia proteins of skunk, meerkat, mongoose, and hyena, which are 
insect-eating species, showed high chitinolytic activity. The cat Chia 
pseudogene product was still inactive even after ORF restoration. However, the 
enzyme was activated by matching the number and position of Cys residues to an 
active form and by introducing five meerkat Chia residues. Mutations affecting 
the Chia conformation and activity after pseudogenization have accumulated in 
the common ancestor of Felidae due to functional constraints. Evolutionary 
analysis indicates that Chia genes are under relaxed selective constraint in 
species with noninsect-based diets except for Canidae. These results suggest 
that there are two types of inactivating processes in Carnivora and that dietary 
changes affect the structure and activity of Chia.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab331
PMCID: PMC8789059
PMID: 34897517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


680. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab328. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab328.

Corrigendum to: Two Functional Epithelial Sodium Channel Isoforms Are Present in 
Rodents despite Pronounced Evolutionary Pseudogenization and Exon Fusion.

Gettings SM, Maxeiner S, Tzika M, Cobain MRD, Ruf I, Benseler F, Brose N, 
Krasteva-Christ G, Vande Velde G, Schönberger M, Althaus M.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5704-5725.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab328
PMCID: PMC8861876
PMID: 34897515


681. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab355. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab355.

Endosperm Evolution by Duplicated and Neofunctionalized Type I MADS-Box 
Transcription Factors.

Qiu Y(1)(2), Köhler C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Uppsala BioCenter, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences and Linnean Centre for Plant Biology, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology, Potsdam-Golm, Germany.

MADS-box transcription factors (TFs) are present in nearly all major eukaryotic 
groups. They are divided into Type I and Type II that differ in domain 
structure, functional roles, and rates of evolution. In flowering plants, major 
evolutionary innovations like flowers, ovules, and fruits have been closely 
connected to Type II MADS-box TFs. The role of Type I MADS-box TFs in angiosperm 
evolution remains to be identified. Here, we show that the formation of 
angiosperm-specific Type I MADS-box clades of Mγ and Mγ-interacting Mα genes 
(Mα*) can be tracked back to the ancestor of all angiosperms. 
Angiosperm-specific Mγ and Mα* genes were preferentially expressed in the 
endosperm, consistent with their proposed function as heterodimers in the 
angiosperm-specific embryo nourishing endosperm tissue. We propose that 
duplication and diversification of Type I MADS genes underpin the evolution of 
the endosperm, a developmental innovation closely connected to the origin and 
success of angiosperms.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab355
PMCID: PMC8788222
PMID: 34897514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


682. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab354. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab354.

Adaptation and Cryptic Pseudogenization in Penguin Toll-Like Receptors.

Fiddaman SR(1), Vinkler M(2), Spiro SG(3), Levy H(1), Emerling CA(4), Boyd 
AC(5), Dimopoulos EA(6), Vianna JA(7), Cole TL(8), Pan H(9), Fang M(9), Zhang 
G(8)(9)(10)(11), Hart T(1), Frantz LAF(12)(13), Smith AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Wildlife Health Services, Zoological Society of London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Biology Department, Reedley College, Reedley, CA, USA.
(5)Jenner Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)The Palaeogenomics and Bio-Archaeology Research Network, Research Laboratory 
for Archaeology and History of Art, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Departamento de Ecosistemas y Medio Ambiente, Facultad de Agronomía e 
Ingeniería Forestal, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Macul, Santiago, 
Chile.
(8)Section for Ecology and Evolution, Department of Biology, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)BGI-Shenzhen, Beishan Industrial Zone, Yantian District, Shenzhen, China.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute 
of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(11)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(12)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Fogg Building, Queen Mary 
University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(13)Institute of Palaeoanatomy, Domestication Research and the History of 
Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ludwig Maximilian 
University of Munich, Munich,Germany.

Penguins (Sphenisciformes) are an iconic order of flightless, diving seabirds 
distributed across a large latitudinal range in the Southern Hemisphere. The 
extensive area over which penguins are endemic is likely to have fostered 
variation in pathogen pressure, which in turn will have imposed differential 
selective pressures on the penguin immune system. At the front line of pathogen 
detection and response, the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) provide insight into host 
evolution in the face of microbial challenge. TLRs respond to conserved 
pathogen-associated molecular patterns and are frequently found to be under 
positive selection, despite retaining specificity for defined agonist classes. 
We undertook a comparative immunogenetics analysis of TLRs for all penguin 
species and found evidence of adaptive evolution that was largely restricted to 
the cell surface-expressed TLRs, with evidence of positive selection at, or 
near, key agonist-binding sites in TLR1B, TLR4, and TLR5. Intriguingly, TLR15, 
which is activated by fungal products, appeared to have been pseudogenized 
multiple times in the Eudyptes spp., but a full-length form was present as a 
rare haplotype at the population level. However, in vitro analysis revealed that 
even the full-length form of Eudyptes TLR15 was nonfunctional, indicating an 
ancestral cryptic pseudogenization prior to its eventual disruption multiple 
times in the Eudyptes lineage. This unusual pseudogenization event could provide 
an insight into immune adaptation to fungal pathogens such as Aspergillus, which 
is responsible for significant mortality in wild and captive bird populations.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab354
PMCID: PMC8788240
PMID: 34897511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


683. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab356. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab356.

Analysis of Eukaryotic lincRNA Sequences Indicates Signatures of Hindered 
Translation Linked to Selection Pressure.

Brümmer A(1)(2), Dreos R(3), Marques AC(1), Bergmann S(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biology (DBC), University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Center for Integrative Genomics (CIG), University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, University of Cape Town, Cape 
Town, South Africa.

Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) represent a large fraction of 
transcribed loci in eukaryotic genomes. Although classified as noncoding, most 
lincRNAs contain open reading frames (ORFs), and it remains unclear why 
cytoplasmic lincRNAs are not or very inefficiently translated. Here, we analyzed 
signatures of hindered translation in lincRNA sequences from five eukaryotes, 
covering a range of natural selection pressures. In fission yeast and 
Caenorhabditis elegans, that is, species under strong selection, we detected 
significantly shorter ORFs, a suboptimal sequence context around start codons 
for translation initiation, and trinucleotides ("codons") corresponding to less 
abundant tRNAs than for neutrally evolving control sequences, likely impeding 
translation elongation. For human, we detected signatures for cell-type-specific 
hindrance of lincRNA translation, in particular codons in abundant cytoplasmic 
lincRNAs corresponding to lower expressed tRNAs than control codons, in three 
out of five human cell lines. We verified that varying tRNA expression levels 
between cell lines are reflected in the amount of ribosomes bound to cytoplasmic 
lincRNAs in each cell line. We further propose that codons at ORF starts are 
particularly important for reducing ribosome-binding to cytoplasmic lincRNA 
ORFs. Altogether, our analyses indicate that in species under stronger selection 
lincRNAs evolved sequence features generally hindering translation and support 
cell-type-specific hindrance of translation efficiency in human lincRNAs. The 
sequence signatures we have identified may improve predicting peptide-coding and 
genuine noncoding lincRNAs in a cell type.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab356
PMCID: PMC8826458
PMID: 34897509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


684. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab338. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab338.

Reverse Chemical Ecology Suggests Putative Primate Pheromones.

Zaremska V(1), Fischer IM(1), Renzone G(2), Arena S(2), Scaloni A(2), Knoll 
W(1)(3), Pelosi P(1).

Author information:
(1)Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Biosensor Technologies, Tulln, 
Austria.
(2)Proteomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, ISPAAM, National Research Council, 
Napoli, Italy.
(3)Department of Physics and Chemistry of Materials, Faculty of Medicine/Dental 
Medicine, Danube Private University, Krems, Austria.

Pheromonal communication is widespread among living organisms, but in apes and 
particularly in humans there is currently no strong evidence for such 
phenomenon. Among primates, lemurs use pheromones to communicate within members 
of the same species, whereas in some monkeys such capabilities seem to be lost. 
Chemical communication in humans appears to be impaired by the lack or 
malfunctioning of biochemical tools and anatomical structures mediating 
detection of pheromones. Here, we report on a pheromone-carrier protein (SAL) 
adopting a "reverse chemical ecology" approach to get insights on the structures 
of potential pheromones in a representative species of lemurs (Microcebus 
murinus) known to use pheromones, Old-World monkeys (Cercocebus atys) for which 
chemical communication has been observed, and humans (Homo sapiens), where 
pheromones and chemical communication are still questioned. We have expressed 
the SAL orthologous proteins of these primate species, after reconstructing the 
gene encoding the human SAL, which is disrupted due to a single base mutation 
preventing its translation into RNA. Ligand-binding experiments with the 
recombinant SALs revealed macrocyclic ketones and lactones as the best ligands 
for all three proteins, suggesting cyclopentadecanone, pentadecanolide, and 
closely related compounds as the best candidates for potential pheromones. Such 
hypothesis agrees with the presence of a chemical very similar to hexadecanolide 
in the gland secretions of Mandrillus sphinx, a species closely related to 
C. atys. Our results indicate that the function of this carrier protein has not 
changed much during evolution from lemurs to humans, although its physiological 
role has been certainly impaired in humans.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab338
PMCID: PMC8789041
PMID: 34897488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


685. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5834. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab320.

Treasurer's Report for Financial Year (FY) 2020.

[No authors listed]

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab320
PMCID: PMC8662603
PMID: 34893886


686. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab343. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab343.

Landscape and Climatic Variations Shaped Secondary Contacts amid Barn Owls of 
the Western Palearctic.

Cumer T(1), Machado AP(1), Dumont G(1), Bontzorlos V(2)(3), Ceccherelli R(4), 
Charter M(5)(6), Dichmann K(7), Kassinis N(8), Lourenço R(9), Manzia F(10), 
Martens HD(11), Prévost L(12), Rakovic M(13), Roque I(9), Siverio F(14), Roulin 
A(1), Goudet J(1)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Green Fund, Kifisia, Athens, Greece.
(3)"TYTO"-Organization for the Management and Conservation of Biodiversity in 
Agricultural Ecosystems, Larisa, Greece.
(4)Centro Recupero Rapaci del Mugello, Firenze, Italy.
(5)Shamir Research Institute, University of Haifa, Katzrin, Israel.
(6)Department of Geography and Environmental Sciences, University of Haifa, 
Haifa, Israel.
(7)Sønderborg, Denmark.
(8)Game and Fauna Service, Ministry of the Interior, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(9)Laboratory of Ornithology, MED Mediterranean Institute for Agriculture, 
Environment and Development, IIFA, University of Évora, Évora, Portugal.
(10)Centro di Recupero per la Fauna Selvatica-LIPU, Rome, Italy.
(11)Neuwittenbek, Germany.
(12)Association C.H.E.N.E., Centre d'Hébergement et d'Etude sur la Nature et 
l'Environnement, Allouville-Bellefosse, France.
(13)Natural History Museum of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(14)Canary Islands' Ornithology and Natural History Group (GOHNIC), Buenavista 
del Norte, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain.
(15)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The combined actions of climatic variations and landscape barriers shape the 
history of natural populations. When organisms follow their shifting niches, 
obstacles in the landscape can lead to the splitting of populations, on which 
evolution will then act independently. When two such populations are reunited, 
secondary contact occurs in a broad range of admixture patterns, from narrow 
hybrid zones to the complete dissolution of lineages. A previous study suggested 
that barn owls colonized the Western Palearctic after the last glaciation in a 
ring-like fashion around the Mediterranean Sea, and conjectured an admixture 
zone in the Balkans. Here, we take advantage of whole-genome sequences of 94 
individuals across the Western Palearctic to reveal the complex history of the 
species in the region using observational and modeling approaches. Even though 
our results confirm that two distinct lineages colonized the region, one in 
Europe and one in the Levant, they suggest that it predates the last glaciation 
and identify a secondary contact zone between the two in Anatolia. We also show 
that barn owls recolonized Europe after the glaciation from two distinct glacial 
refugia: a previously identified western one in Iberia and a new eastern one in 
Italy. Both glacial lineages now communicate via eastern Europe, in a wide and 
permeable contact zone. This complex history of populations enlightens the 
taxonomy of Tyto alba in the region, highlights the key role played by mountain 
ranges and large water bodies as barriers and illustrates the power of 
population genomics in uncovering intricate demographic patterns.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab343
PMCID: PMC8789042
PMID: 34893883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


687. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab346. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab346.

Loss of Timeless Underlies an Evolutionary Transition within the Circadian 
Clock.

Kotwica-Rolinska J(1), Chodáková L(1)(2), Smýkal V(1), Damulewicz M(1), 
Provazník J(1), Wu BC(1)(2), Hejníková M(1)(2), Chvalová D(1), Doležel D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Entomology, 
České Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice, Czech 
Republic.

Most organisms possess time-keeping devices called circadian clocks. At the 
molecular level, circadian clocks consist of transcription-translation feedback 
loops (TTFLs). Although some components of the negative TTFL are conserved 
across the animals, important differences exist between typical models, such as 
mouse and the fruit fly. In Drosophila, the key components are PERIOD (PER) and 
TIMELESS (TIM-d) proteins, whereas the mammalian clock relies on PER and 
CRYPTOCHROME (CRY-m). Importantly, how the clock has maintained functionality 
during evolutionary transitions between different states remains elusive. 
Therefore, we systematically described the circadian clock gene setup in major 
bilaterian lineages and identified marked lineage-specific differences in their 
clock constitution. Then we performed a thorough functional analysis of the 
linden bug Pyrrhocoris apterus, an insect species comprising features 
characteristic of both the Drosophila and the mammalian clocks. Unexpectedly, 
the knockout of timeless-d, a gene essential for the clock ticking in 
Drosophila, did not compromise rhythmicity in P. apterus, it only accelerated 
its pace. Furthermore, silencing timeless-m, the ancestral timeless type 
ubiquitously present across animals, resulted in a mild gradual loss of 
rhythmicity, supporting its possible participation in the linden bug clock, 
which is consistent with timeless-m role suggested by research on mammalian 
models. The dispensability of timeless-d in P. apterus allows drawing a scenario 
in which the clock has remained functional at each step of transition from an 
ancestral state to the TIM-d-independent PER + CRY-m system operating in extant 
vertebrates, including humans.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab346
PMCID: PMC8789273
PMID: 34893879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


688. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab342. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab342.

Joint Inference of Migration and Reassortment Patterns for Viruses with 
Segmented Genomes.

Stolz U(1)(2), Stadler T(1)(2), Müller NF(1)(2)(3), Vaughan TG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zürich, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.

The structured coalescent allows inferring migration patterns between viral 
subpopulations from genetic sequence data. However, these analyses typically 
assume that no genetic recombination process impacted the sequence evolution of 
pathogens. For segmented viruses, such as influenza, that can undergo 
reassortment this assumption is broken. Reassortment reshuffles the segments of 
different parent lineages upon a coinfection event, which means that the shared 
history of viruses has to be represented by a network instead of a tree. 
Therefore, full genome analyses of such viruses are complex or even impossible. 
Although this problem has been addressed for unstructured populations, it is 
still impossible to account for population structure, such as induced by 
different host populations, whereas also accounting for reassortment. We address 
this by extending the structured coalescent to account for reassortment and 
present a framework for investigating possible ties between reassortment and 
migration (host jump) events. This method can accurately estimate subpopulation 
dependent effective populations sizes, reassortment, and migration rates from 
simulated data. Additionally, we apply the new model to avian influenza A/H5N1 
sequences, sampled from two avian host types, Anseriformes and Galliformes. We 
contrast our results with a structured coalescent without reassortment 
inference, which assumes independently evolving segments. This reveals that 
taking into account segment reassortment and using sequencing data from several 
viral segments for joint phylodynamic inference leads to different estimates for 
effective population sizes, migration, and clock rates. This new model is 
implemented as the Structured Coalescent with Reassortment package for BEAST 2.5 
and is available at https://github.com/jugne/SCORE.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab342
PMCID: PMC8789051
PMID: 34893876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


689. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab340. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab340.

Island Biogeography Revisited: Museomics Reveals Affinities of Shelf Island 
Birds Determined by Bathymetry and Paleo-Rivers, Not by Distance to Mainland.

Garg KM(1)(2)(3), Chattopadhyay B(1)(4), Cros E(1), Tomassi S(5), Benedick S(6), 
Edwards DP(5), Rheindt FE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.
(2)Centre for Interdisciplinary Archaeological Research, Ashoka University, 
Sonipat, India.
(3)Department of Biology, Ashoka University, Sonipat, India.
(4)Trivedi School of Biosciences, Ashoka University, Sonipat, India.
(5)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
United Kingdom.
(6)Faculty of Sustainable Agriculture, University of Malaysia, Sabah, Malaysia.

Island biogeography is one of the most powerful subdisciplines of ecology: its 
mathematical predictions that island size and distance to mainland determine 
diversity have withstood the test of time. A key question is whether these 
predictions follow at a population-genomic level. Using rigorous ancient-DNA 
protocols, we retrieved approximately 1,000 genomic markers from approximately 
100 historic specimens of two Southeast Asian songbird complexes from across the 
Sunda Shelf archipelago collected 1893-1957. We show that the genetic affinities 
of populations on small shelf islands defy the predictions of geographic 
distance and appear governed by Earth-historic factors including the position of 
terrestrial barriers (paleo-rivers) and persistence of corridors (Quaternary 
land bridges). Our analyses suggest that classic island-biogeographic predictors 
may not hold well for population-genomic dynamics on the thousands of shelf 
islands across the globe, which are exposed to dynamic changes in land 
distribution during Quaternary climate change.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab340
PMCID: PMC8789277
PMID: 34893875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


690. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab348. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab348.

Phylogenetic and Molecular Analyses Identify SNORD116 Targets Involved in the 
Prader-Willi Syndrome.

Baldini L(1), Robert A(1), Charpentier B(1), Labialle S(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Lorraine, CNRS, Nancy, France.

The eutherian-specific SNORD116 family of repeated box C/D snoRNA genes is 
suspected to play a major role in the Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), yet its 
molecular function remains poorly understood. Here, we combined phylogenetic and 
molecular analyses to identify candidate RNA targets. Based on the analysis of 
several eutherian orthologs, we found evidence of extensive birth-and-death and 
conversion events during SNORD116 gene history. However, the consequences for 
phylogenetic conservation were heterogeneous along the gene sequence. The 
standard snoRNA elements necessary for RNA stability and association with 
dedicated core proteins were the most conserved, in agreement with the 
hypothesis that SNORD116 generate genuine snoRNAs. In addition, one of the two 
antisense elements typically involved in RNA target recognition was largely 
dominated by a unique sequence present in at least one subset of gene paralogs 
in most species, likely the result of a selective effect. In agreement with a 
functional role, this ASE exhibited a hybridization capacity with putative mRNA 
targets that was strongly conserved in eutherians. Moreover, transient 
downregulation experiments in human cells showed that Snord116 controls the 
expression and splicing levels of these mRNAs. The functions of two of them, 
diacylglycerol kinase kappa and Neuroligin 3, extend the description of the 
molecular bases of PWS and reveal unexpected molecular links with the Fragile X 
syndrome and autism spectrum disorders.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab348
PMCID: PMC8789076
PMID: 34893870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


691. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab345. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab345.

Selection for Cell Yield Does Not Reduce Overflow Metabolism in Escherichia 
coli.

Rabbers I(1), Gottstein W(1), Feist AM(2)(3), Teusink B(1), Bruggeman FJ(1), 
Bachmann H(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Systems Biology Lab, Amsterdam Institute of Molecular and Life Sciences 
(AIMMS), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(3)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of 
Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(4)NIZO Food Research, Ede, The Netherlands.

Overflow metabolism is ubiquitous in nature, and it is often considered 
inefficient because it leads to a relatively low biomass yield per consumed 
carbon. This metabolic strategy has been described as advantageous because it 
supports high growth rates during nutrient competition. Here, we experimentally 
evolved bacteria without nutrient competition by repeatedly growing and mixing 
millions of parallel batch cultures of Escherichia coli. Each culture originated 
from a water-in-oil emulsion droplet seeded with a single cell. Unexpectedly we 
found that overflow metabolism (acetate production) did not change. Instead, the 
numerical cell yield during the consumption of the accumulated acetate increased 
as a consequence of a reduction in cell size. Our experiments and a mathematical 
model show that fast growth and overflow metabolism, followed by the consumption 
of the overflow metabolite, can lead to a higher numerical cell yield and 
therefore a higher fitness compared with full respiration of the substrate. This 
provides an evolutionary scenario where overflow metabolism can be favorable 
even in the absence of nutrient competition.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab345
PMCID: PMC8789295
PMID: 34893866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


692. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab347. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab347.

Novel Insights on Obligate Symbiont Lifestyle and Adaptation to Chemosynthetic 
Environment as Revealed by the Giant Tubeworm Genome.

de Oliveira AL(1), Mitchell J(2), Girguis P(2), Bright M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.

The mutualism between the giant tubeworm Riftia pachyptila and its endosymbiont 
Candidatus Endoriftia persephone has been extensively researched over the past 
40 years. However, the lack of the host whole-genome information has impeded the 
full comprehension of the genotype/phenotype interface in Riftia. Here, we 
described the high-quality draft genome of Riftia, its complete mitogenome, and 
tissue-specific transcriptomic data. The Riftia genome presents signs of 
reductive evolution, with gene family contractions exceeding expansions. 
Expanded gene families are related to sulfur metabolism, detoxification, 
antioxidative stress, oxygen transport, immune system, and lysosomal digestion, 
reflecting evolutionary adaptations to the vent environment and endosymbiosis. 
Despite the derived body plan, the developmental gene repertoire in the gutless 
tubeworm is extremely conserved with the presence of a near intact and complete 
Hox cluster. Gene expression analyses establish that the trophosome is a 
multifunctional organ marked by intracellular digestion of endosymbionts, 
storage of excretory products, and hematopoietic functions. Overall, the plume 
and gonad tissues both in contact to the environment harbor highly expressed 
genes involved with cell cycle, programed cell death, and immunity indicating a 
high cell turnover and defense mechanisms against pathogens. We posit that the 
innate immune system plays a more prominent role into the establishment of the 
symbiosis during the infection in the larval stage, rather than maintaining the 
symbiostasis in the trophosome. This genome bridges four decades of 
physiological research in Riftia, whereas it simultaneously provides new 
insights into the development, whole organism functions, and evolution in the 
giant tubeworm.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab347
PMCID: PMC8789280
PMID: 34893862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


693. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab352. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab352.

Functional Constraints on Insect Immune System Components Govern Their 
Evolutionary Trajectories.

Ruzzante L(1), Feron R(1), Reijnders MJMF(1), Thiébaut A(1), Waterhouse RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Roles of constraints in shaping evolutionary outcomes are often considered in 
the contexts of developmental biology and population genetics, in terms of 
capacities to generate new variants and how selection limits or promotes 
consequent phenotypic changes. Comparative genomics also recognizes the role of 
constraints, in terms of shaping evolution of gene and genome architectures, 
sequence evolutionary rates, and gene gains or losses, as well as on molecular 
phenotypes. Characterizing patterns of genomic change where putative functions 
and interactions of system components are relatively well described offers 
opportunities to explore whether genes with similar roles exhibit similar 
evolutionary trajectories. Using insect immunity as our test case system, we 
hypothesize that characterizing gene evolutionary histories can define distinct 
dynamics associated with different functional roles. We develop metrics that 
quantify gene evolutionary histories, employ these to characterize evolutionary 
features of immune gene repertoires, and explore relationships between gene 
family evolutionary profiles and their roles in immunity to understand how 
different constraints may relate to distinct dynamics. We identified three main 
axes of evolutionary trajectories characterized by gene duplication and synteny, 
maintenance/stability and sequence conservation, and loss and sequence 
divergence, highlighting similar and contrasting patterns across these axes 
amongst subsets of immune genes. Our results suggest that where and how genes 
participate in immune responses limit the range of possible evolutionary 
scenarios they exhibit. The test case study system of insect immunity highlights 
the potential of applying comparative genomics approaches to characterize how 
functional constraints on different components of biological systems govern 
their evolutionary trajectories.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab352
PMCID: PMC8788225
PMID: 34893861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


694. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab353. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab353.

Whole-Genome Resequencing of Worldwide Wild and Domestic Sheep Elucidates 
Genetic Diversity, Introgression, and Agronomically Important Loci.

Lv FH(1), Cao YH(2)(3), Liu GJ(4), Luo LY(1), Lu R(1), Liu MJ(5), Li WR(5), Zhou 
P(6)(7), Wang XH(6)(7), Shen M(6)(7), Gao L(6)(7), Yang JQ(6)(7), Yang H(6)(7), 
Yang YL(6)(7), Liu CB(6)(7), Wan PC(6)(7), Zhang YS(6)(7), Pi WH(6)(7), Ren 
YL(8), Shen ZQ(8), Wang F(9), Wang YT(10), Li JQ(11), Salehian-Dehkordi H(2)(3), 
Hehua E(12), Liu YG(13), Chen JF(1), Wang JK(1), Deng XM(1), Esmailizadeh A(14), 
Dehghani-Qanatqestani M(14), Charati H(14), Nosrati M(15), Štěpánek O(16), 
Rushdi HE(17), Olsaker I(18), Curik I(19), Gorkhali NA(20), Paiva SR(21), 
Caetano AR(21), Ciani E(22), Amills M(23)(24), Weimann C(25), Erhardt G(25), 
Amane A(26)(27), Mwacharo JM(28)(29), Han JL(30)(31), Hanotte O(27)(32), 
Periasamy K(33), Johansson AM(34), Hallsson JH(35), Kantanen J(36), Coltman 
DW(37), Bruford MW(38)(39), Lenstra JA(40), Li MH(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China.
(3)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS), 
Beijing, China.
(4)Novogene Bioinformatics Institute, Beijing, China.
(5)Animal Biotechnological Research Center, Xinjiang Academy of Animal Science, 
Urumqi, China.
(6)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Xinjiang Academy of 
Agricultural and Reclamation Sciences, Shihezi, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Sheep Genetic Improvement and Healthy Production, 
Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural and Reclamation Sciences, Shihezi, China.
(8)Shandong Binzhou Academy of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Binzhou, 
China.
(9)Institute of Sheep and Goat Science, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, China.
(10)College of Life and Geographic Sciences, Kashi University, Kashi, China.
(11)College of Animal Science, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Hohhot, 
China.
(12)Grass-Feeding Livestock Engineering Technology Research Center, Ningxia 
Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Yinchuan, China.
(13)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan Agricultural University, 
Kunming, China.
(14)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Shahid Bahonar 
University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran.
(15)Department of Agriculture, Payame Noor University, Tehran, Iran.
(16)Department of Virology, State Veterinary Institute Jihlava, Jihlava, Czech 
Republic.
(17)Department of Animal Production, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, 
12613 Giza, Egypt.
(18)Department of Preclinical Sciences and Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, Norway.
(19)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, University of Zagreb, 
Zagreb, Croatia.
(20)Animal Breeding Division, National Animal Science Institute, Nepal 
Agriculture Research Council (NARC), Kathmandu, Nepal.
(21)Embrapa Recursos Genéticos e Biotecnologia, Parque Estação Biológica, PqEB, 
Brasília, DF, Brazil.
(22)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Biotecnologie e Biofarmaceutica, Università 
degli Studi di Bari Aldo 24 Moro, Bari, Italy.
(23)Department of Animal Genetics, Center for Research in Agricultural Genomics 
(CRAG), CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Campus de la Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Bellaterra, Spain.
(24)Department of Animal Sciences, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Bellaterra, Spain.
(25)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University 
Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(26)Department of Microbial, Cellular and Molecular Biology, Addis Ababa 
University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(27)LiveGene Program, International Livestock Research Institute, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia.
(28)Small Ruminant Genomics, International Centre for Agricultural Research in 
the Dry Areas (ICARDA), Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(29)CTLGH and SRUC, The Roslin Institute Building, Easter Bush Campus, 
Edinburgh, Scotland.
(30)CAAS-ILRI Joint Laboratory on Livestock and Forage Genetic Resources, 
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), 
Beijing, China.
(31)Livestock Genetics Program, International Livestock Research Institute 
(ILRI), Nairobi, Kenya.
(32)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, 
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(33)Animal Production and Health Laboratory, Joint FAO/IAEA Division, 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Vienna, Austria.
(34)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine 
and Animal Science, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(35)Faculty of Natural Resources and Environmental Sciences, Agricultural 
University of Iceland, Borgarnes, Iceland.
(36)Production Systems, Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke), Jokioinen, 
Finland.
(37)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(38)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cathays Park, Cardiff, Wales, 
United Kingdom.
(39)Sustainable Places Research Institute, Cardiff University, Wales, United 
Kingdom.
(40)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.

Domestic sheep and their wild relatives harbor substantial genetic variants that 
can form the backbone of molecular breeding, but their genome landscapes remain 
understudied. Here, we present a comprehensive genome resource for wild ovine 
species, landraces and improved breeds of domestic sheep, comprising 
high-coverage (∼16.10×) whole genomes of 810 samples from 7 wild species and 158 
diverse domestic populations. We detected, in total, ∼121.2 million single 
nucleotide polymorphisms, ∼61 million of which are novel. Some display 
significant (P < 0.001) differences in frequency between wild and domestic 
species, or are private to continent-wide or individual sheep populations. 
Retained or introgressed wild gene variants in domestic populations have 
contributed to local adaptation, such as the variation in the HBB associated 
with plateau adaptation. We identified novel and previously reported targets of 
selection on morphological and agronomic traits such as stature, horn, tail 
configuration, and wool fineness. We explored the genetic basis of wool fineness 
and unveiled a novel mutation (chr25: T7,068,586C) in the 3'-UTR of IRF2BP2 as 
plausible causal variant for fleece fiber diameter. We reconstructed 
prehistorical migrations from the Near Eastern domestication center to 
South-and-Southeast Asia and found two main waves of migrations across the 
Eurasian Steppe and the Iranian Plateau in the Early and Late Bronze Ages. Our 
findings refine our understanding of genome variation as shaped by continental 
migrations, introgression, adaptation, and selection of sheep.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab353
PMCID: PMC8826587
PMID: 34893856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


695. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab332. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab332.

A Deep-Learning Approach for Inference of Selective Sweeps from the Ancestral 
Recombination Graph.

Hejase HA(1), Mo Z(1)(2), Campagna L(3)(4), Siepel A(1).

Author information:
(1)Simons Center for Quantitative Biology, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold 
Spring Harbor, NY, USA.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring 
Harbor, NY, USA.
(3)Fuller Evolutionary Biology Program, Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY, 
USA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY, USA.

Detecting signals of selection from genomic data is a central problem in 
population genetics. Coupling the rich information in the ancestral 
recombination graph (ARG) with a powerful and scalable deep-learning framework, 
we developed a novel method to detect and quantify positive selection: Selection 
Inference using the Ancestral recombination graph (SIA). Built on a Long 
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture, a particular type of a Recurrent Neural 
Network (RNN), SIA can be trained to explicitly infer a full range of selection 
coefficients, as well as the allele frequency trajectory and time of selection 
onset. We benchmarked SIA extensively on simulations under a European human 
demographic model, and found that it performs as well or better as some of the 
best available methods, including state-of-the-art machine-learning and 
ARG-based methods. In addition, we used SIA to estimate selection coefficients 
at several loci associated with human phenotypes of interest. SIA detected novel 
signals of selection particular to the European (CEU) population at the MC1R and 
ABCC11 loci. In addition, it recapitulated signals of selection at the LCT locus 
and several pigmentation-related genes. Finally, we reanalyzed polymorphism data 
of a collection of recently radiated southern capuchino seedeater taxa in the 
genus Sporophila to quantify the strength of selection and improved the power of 
our previous methods to detect partial soft sweeps. Overall, SIA uses deep 
learning to leverage the ARG and thereby provides new insight into how selective 
sweeps shape genomic diversity.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab332
PMCID: PMC8789311
PMID: 34888675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


696. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab349. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab349.

Genomic Signatures of Sexual Selection on Pollen-Expressed Genes in Arabis 
alpina.

Gutiérrez-Valencia J(1), Fracassetti M(1), Horvath R(1), Laenen B(1), Désamore 
A(1), Drouzas AD(2), Friberg M(3), Kolář F(4), Slotte T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Environment, and Plant Sciences, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Systematic Botany and Phytogeography, School of Biology, 
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.

Fertilization in angiosperms involves the germination of pollen on the stigma, 
followed by the extrusion of a pollen tube that elongates through the style and 
delivers two sperm cells to the embryo sac. Sexual selection could occur 
throughout this process when male gametophytes compete for fertilization. The 
strength of sexual selection during pollen competition should be affected by the 
number of genotypes deposited on the stigma. As increased self-fertilization 
reduces the number of mating partners, and the genetic diversity and 
heterozygosity of populations, it should thereby reduce the intensity of sexual 
selection during pollen competition. Despite the prevalence of mating system 
shifts, few studies have directly compared the molecular signatures of sexual 
selection during pollen competition in populations with different mating 
systems. Here we analyzed whole-genome sequences from natural populations of 
Arabis alpina, a species showing mating system variation across its 
distribution, to test whether shifts from cross- to self-fertilization result in 
molecular signatures consistent with sexual selection on genes involved in 
pollen competition. We found evidence for efficient purifying selection on genes 
expressed in vegetative pollen, and overall weaker selection on sperm-expressed 
genes. This pattern was robust when controlling for gene expression level and 
specificity. In agreement with the expectation that sexual selection intensifies 
under cross-fertilization, we found that the efficacy of purifying selection on 
male gametophyte-expressed genes was significantly stronger in genetically more 
diverse and outbred populations. Our results show that intra-sexual competition 
shapes the evolution of pollen-expressed genes, and that its strength fades with 
increasing self-fertilization rates.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab349
PMCID: PMC8788238
PMID: 34878144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


697. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab350. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab350.

Intermolecular Interactions Drive Protein Adaptive and Coadaptive Evolution at 
Both Species and Population Levels.

Peng J(1), Svetec N(1), Zhao L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics and Genomics, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY, USA.

Proteins are the building blocks for almost all the functions in cells. 
Understanding the molecular evolution of proteins and the forces that shape 
protein evolution is essential in understanding the basis of function and 
evolution. Previous studies have shown that adaptation frequently occurs at the 
protein surface, such as in genes involved in host-pathogen interactions. 
However, it remains unclear whether adaptive sites are distributed randomly or 
at regions associated with particular structural or functional characteristics 
across the genome, since many proteins lack structural or functional 
annotations. Here, we seek to tackle this question by combining large-scale 
bioinformatic prediction, structural analysis, phylogenetic inference, and 
population genomic analysis of Drosophila protein-coding genes. We found that 
protein sequence adaptation is more relevant to function-related rather than 
structure-related properties. Interestingly, intermolecular interactions 
contribute significantly to protein adaptation. We further showed that 
intermolecular interactions, such as physical interactions, may play a role in 
the coadaptation of fast-adaptive proteins. We found that strongly 
differentiated amino acids across geographic regions in protein-coding genes are 
mostly adaptive, which may contribute to the long-term adaptive evolution. This 
strongly indicates that a number of adaptive sites tend to be repeatedly mutated 
and selected throughout evolution in the past, present, and maybe future. Our 
results highlight the important roles of intermolecular interactions and 
coadaptation in the adaptive evolution of proteins both at the species and 
population levels.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab350
PMCID: PMC8789070
PMID: 34878126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


698. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab339. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab339.

Population Histories and Genomic Diversity of South American Natives.

Castro E Silva MA(1), Ferraz T(1), Couto-Silva CM(1), Lemes RB(1), Nunes K(1), 
Comas D(2), Hünemeier T(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências, 
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Departament de Ciències, Institut de Biologia Evolutiva, Experimentals i de 
la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

South America is home to one of the most culturally diverse present-day native 
populations. However, the dispersion pattern, genetic substructure, and 
demographic complexity within South America are still poorly understood. Based 
on genome-wide data of 58 native populations, we provide a comprehensive 
scenario of South American indigenous groups considering the genomic, 
environmental, and linguistic data. Clear patterns of genetic structure were 
inferred among the South American natives, presenting at least four primary 
genetic clusters in the Amazonian and savanna regions and three clusters in the 
Andes and Pacific coast. We detected a cline of genetic variation along a 
west-east axis, contradicting a hard Andes-Amazon divide. This longitudinal 
genetic variation seemed to have been shaped by both serial population 
bottlenecks and isolation by distance. Results indicated that present-day South 
American substructures recapitulate ancient macroregional ancestries and western 
Amazonia groups show genetic evidence of cultural exchanges that led to language 
replacement in precontact times. Finally, demographic inferences pointed to a 
higher resilience of the western South American groups regarding population 
collapses caused by the European invasion and indicated precontact population 
reductions and demic expansions in South America.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab339
PMCID: PMC8789086
PMID: 34875092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


699. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab341. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab341.

Multiple Novel Traits without Immediate Benefits Originate in Bacteria Evolving 
on Single Antibiotics.

Karve S(1), Wagner A(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Quartier Sorge-Batiment Genopode, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA.
(4)Stellenbosch Institute for Advanced Study (STIAS), Wallenberg Research 
Centre, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.

How new traits originate in evolution is a fundamental question of evolutionary 
biology. When such traits arise, they can either be immediately beneficial in 
their environment of origin, or they may become beneficial only in a future 
environment. Compared to immediately beneficial novel traits, novel traits 
without immediate benefits remain poorly studied. Here we use experimental 
evolution to study novel traits that are not immediately beneficial but that 
allow bacteria to survive in new environments. Specifically, we evolved multiple 
E. coli populations in five antibiotics with different mechanisms of action, and 
then determined their ability to grow in more than 200 environments that are 
different from the environment in which they evolved. Our populations evolved 
viability in multiple environments that contain not just clinically relevant 
antibiotics, but a broad range of antimicrobial molecules, such as surfactants, 
organic and inorganic salts, nucleotide analogues and pyridine derivatives. 
Genome sequencing of multiple evolved clones shows that pleiotropic mutations 
are important for the origin of these novel traits. Our experiments, which 
lasted fewer than 250 generations, demonstrate that evolution can readily create 
an enormous reservoir of latent traits in microbial populations. These traits 
can facilitate adaptive evolution in a changing world.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab341
PMCID: PMC8789282
PMID: 34865131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


700. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab333. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab333.

Limited Introgression between Rock-Wallabies with Extensive Chromosomal 
Rearrangements.

Potter S(1)(2), Bragg JG(3), Turakulov R(1), Eldridge MDB(2), Deakin J(4), 
Kirkpatrick M(5), Edwards RJ(6), Moritz C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Ecology and Evolution, Research School of Biology, The Australian 
National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(2)Australian Museum Research Institute, Australian Museum, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)National Herbarium of New South Wales, The Royal Botanical Gardens and Domain 
Trust, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Institute for Applied Ecology, University of Canberra, Bruce, ACT, Australia.
(5)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA.
(6)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Chromosome rearrangements can result in the rapid evolution of hybrid 
incompatibilities. Robertsonian fusions, particularly those with monobrachial 
homology, can drive reproductive isolation amongst recently diverged taxa. The 
recent radiation of rock-wallabies (genus Petrogale) is an important model to 
explore the role of Robertsonian fusions in speciation. Here, we pursue that 
goal using an extensive sampling of populations and genomes of Petrogale from 
north-eastern Australia. In contrast to previous assessments using mitochondrial 
DNA or nuclear microsatellite loci, genomic data are able to separate the most 
closely related species and to resolve their divergence histories. Both 
phylogenetic and population genetic analyses indicate introgression between two 
species that differ by a single Robertsonian fusion. Based on the available 
data, there is also evidence for introgression between two species which share 
complex chromosomal rearrangements. However, the remaining results show no 
consistent signature of introgression amongst species pairs and where evident, 
indicate generally low introgression overall. X-linked loci have elevated 
divergence compared with autosomal loci indicating a potential role for genic 
evolution to produce reproductive isolation in concert with chromosome change. 
Our results highlight the value of genome scale data in evaluating the role of 
Robertsonian fusions and structural variation in divergence, speciation, and 
patterns of molecular evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab333
PMCID: PMC8788226
PMID: 34865126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


701. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab344. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab344.

MicroRNAs as Indicators into the Causes and Consequences of Whole-Genome 
Duplication Events.

Peterson KJ(1), Beavan A(2)(3), Chabot PJ(1), McPeek MA(1), Pisani D(2)(3), 
Fromm B(4), Simakov O(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA.
(2)School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Arctic University Museum of Norway, UiT, The Arctic University of Norway, 
Tromsø, Norway.
(5)Department of Neuroscience and Developmental Biology, University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.

Whole-genome duplications (WGDs) have long been considered the causal mechanism 
underlying dramatic increases to morphological complexity due to the 
neo-functionalization of paralogs generated during these events. Nonetheless, an 
alternative hypothesis suggests that behind the retention of most paralogs is 
not neo-functionalization, but instead the degree of the inter-connectivity of 
the intended gene product, as well as the mode of the WGD itself. Here, we 
explore both the causes and consequences of WGD by examining the distribution, 
expression, and molecular evolution of microRNAs (miRNAs) in both gnathostome 
vertebrates as well as chelicerate arthropods. We find that although the number 
of miRNA paralogs tracks the number of WGDs experienced within the lineage, few 
of these paralogs experienced changes to the seed sequence, and thus are 
functionally equivalent relative to their mRNA targets. Nonetheless, in 
gnathostomes, although the retention of paralogs following the 1R 
autotetraploidization event is similar across the two subgenomes, the paralogs 
generated by the gnathostome 2R allotetraploidization event are retained in 
higher numbers on one subgenome relative to the second, with the miRNAs found on 
the preferred subgenome showing both higher expression of mature miRNA 
transcripts and slower molecular evolution of the precursor miRNA sequences. 
Importantly, WGDs do not result in the creation of miRNA novelty, nor do WGDs 
correlate to increases in complexity. Instead, it is the number of miRNA seed 
sequences in the genome itself that not only better correlate to instances in 
complexification, but also mechanistically explain why complexity increases when 
new miRNA families are established.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab344
PMCID: PMC8789304
PMID: 34865078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


702. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab334. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab334.

Pif1 Helicases and the Evidence for a Prokaryotic Origin of Helitrons.

Heringer P(1), Kuhn GCS(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Ecologia e Evolução, Instituto de Ciências 
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

Helitrons are the only group of rolling-circle transposons that encode a 
transposase with a helicase domain (Hel), which belongs to the Pif1 family. 
Because Pif1 helicases are important components of eukaryotic genomes, it has 
been suggested that Hel domains probably originated after a host eukaryotic Pif1 
gene was captured by a Helitron ancestor. However, the few analyses exploring 
the evolution of Helitron transposases (RepHel) have focused on its Rep domain, 
which is also present in other mobile genetic elements. Here, we used 
phylogenetic and nonmetric multidimensional scaling analyses to investigate the 
relationship between Hel domains and Pif1-like helicases from a variety of 
organisms. Our results reveal that Hel domains are only distantly related to 
genomic helicases from eukaryotes and prokaryotes, and thus are unlikely to have 
originated from a captured Pif1 gene. Based on this evidence, and on recent 
studies indicating that Rep domains are more closely related to rolling-circle 
plasmids and phages, we suggest that Helitrons are descendants of a 
RepHel-encoding prokaryotic plasmid element that invaded eukaryotic genomes 
before the radiation of its major groups. We discuss how a Pif1-like helicase 
domain might have favored the transposition of Helitrons in eukaryotes beyond 
simply unwinding DNA intermediates. Finally, we demonstrate that some examples 
in the literature describing genomic helicases from eukaryotes actually consist 
of Hel domains from Helitrons, a finding that underscores how transposons can 
hamper the analysis of eukaryotic genes. This investigation also revealed that 
two groups of land plants appear to have lost genomic Pif1 helicases 
independently.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab334
PMCID: PMC8788227
PMID: 34850089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


703. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5831-5833. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab325.

SMBE Secretary's Report.

Singh N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Oregon.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab325
PMCID: PMC8662590
PMID: 34850075


704. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab335. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab335.

Evolution under Spatially Heterogeneous Selection in Solid Tumors.

Li G(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Yang Z(2)(3)(6), Wu D(2)(3)(7), Liu S(2)(3)(5), Li 
X(2)(3)(5), Li T(2)(3)(5), Li Y(2)(3)(5), Liang L(2)(3), Zou W(8)(9), Wu 
CI(2)(3)(10), Wang HY(11)(12), Lu X(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)China National Center for Bioinformation, Beijing, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(5)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(6)Institute of Environmental Science and Research, Porirua, New Zealand.
(7)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(8)Surgery of Liver Transplant, The Third Medical Center of Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(9)Surgery of Hepatopancreatobiliary, Peking University Shougang Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, College of Ecology and Evolution, Sun 
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(11)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(12)Institute of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

Spatial genetic and phenotypic diversity within solid tumors has been well 
documented. Nevertheless, how this heterogeneity affects temporal dynamics of 
tumorigenesis has not been rigorously examined because solid tumors do not 
evolve as the standard population genetic model due to the spatial constraint. 
We therefore, propose a neutral spatial (NS) model whereby the mutation 
accumulation increases toward the periphery; the genealogical relationship is 
spatially determined and the selection efficacy is blunted (due to kin 
competition). In this model, neutral mutations are accrued and spatially 
distributed in manners different from those of advantageous mutations. 
Importantly, the distinctions could be blurred in the conventional model. To 
test the NS model, we performed a three-dimensional multiple microsampling of 
two hepatocellular carcinomas. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) revealed a 2-fold 
increase in mutations going from the center to the periphery. The operation of 
natural selection can then be tested by examining the spatially determined 
clonal relationships and the clonal sizes. Due to limited migration, only the 
expansion of highly advantageous clones can sweep through a large part of the 
tumor to reveal the selective advantages. Hence, even multiregional sampling can 
only reveal a fraction of fitness differences in solid tumors. Our results 
suggest that the NS patterns are crucial for testing the influence of natural 
selection during tumorigenesis, especially for small solid tumors.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab335
PMCID: PMC8788224
PMID: 34850073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


705. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab329. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab329.

Hundreds of Out-of-Frame Remodeled Gene Families in the Escherichia coli 
Pangenome.

Watson AK(1), Lopez P(1), Bapteste E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Systématique, Evolution, Biodiversité (ISYEB), Sorbonne 
Université, CNRS, Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, EPHE, Université des 
Antilles, Paris, France.

All genomes include gene families with very limited taxonomic distributions that 
potentially represent new genes and innovations in protein-coding sequence, 
raising questions on the origins of such genes. Some of these genes are 
hypothesized to have formed de novo, from noncoding sequences, and recent work 
has begun to elucidate the processes by which de novo gene formation can occur. 
A special case of de novo gene formation, overprinting, describes the origin of 
new genes from noncoding alternative reading frames of existing open reading 
frames (ORFs). We argue that additionally, out-of-frame gene fission/fusion 
events of alternative reading frames of ORFs and out-of-frame lateral gene 
transfers could contribute to the origin of new gene families. To demonstrate 
this, we developed an original pattern-search in sequence similarity networks, 
enhancing the use of these graphs, commonly used to detect in-frame remodeled 
genes. We applied this approach to gene families in 524 complete genomes of 
Escherichia coli. We identified 767 gene families whose evolutionary history 
likely included at least one out-of-frame remodeling event. These genes with 
out-of-frame components represent ∼2.5% of all genes in the E. coli pangenome, 
suggesting that alternative reading frames of existing ORFs can contribute to a 
significant proportion of de novo genes in bacteria.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab329
PMCID: PMC8788219
PMID: 34792602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


706. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab330. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab330.

Slow Recovery from Inbreeding Depression Generated by the Complex Genetic 
Architecture of Segregating Deleterious Mutations.

Adams PE(1), Crist AB(2), Young EM(3), Willis JH(3), Phillips PC(3), Fierst 
JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, 
USA.
(2)Department of Genomes and Genetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.

The deleterious effects of inbreeding have been of extreme importance to 
evolutionary biology, but it has been difficult to characterize the complex 
interactions between genetic constraints and selection that lead to fitness loss 
and recovery after inbreeding. Haploid organisms and selfing organisms like the 
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans are capable of rapid recovery from the fixation 
of novel deleterious mutation; however, the potential for recovery and genomic 
consequences of inbreeding in diploid, outcrossing organisms are not well 
understood. We sought to answer two questions: 1) Can a diploid, outcrossing 
population recover from inbreeding via standing genetic variation and new 
mutation? and 2) How does allelic diversity change during recovery? We inbred C. 
remanei, an outcrossing relative of C. elegans, through brother-sister mating 
for 30 generations followed by recovery at large population size. Inbreeding 
reduced fitness but, surprisingly, recovery from inbreeding at large populations 
sizes generated only very moderate fitness recovery after 300 generations. We 
found that 65% of ancestral single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were fixed in 
the inbred population, far fewer than the theoretical expectation of ∼99%. Under 
recovery, 36 SNPs across 30 genes involved in alimentary, muscular, nervous, and 
reproductive systems changed reproducibly across replicates, indicating that 
strong selection for fitness recovery does exist. Our results indicate that 
recovery from inbreeding depression via standing genetic variation and mutation 
is likely to be constrained by the large number of segregating deleterious 
variants present in natural populations, limiting the capacity for recovery of 
small populations.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab330
PMCID: PMC8789292
PMID: 34791426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


707. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5830. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab319.

A Report by the Editor-in-Chief for Molecular Biology and Evolution (MBE), 
Volume 37.

Kumar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab319
PMCID: PMC8662649
PMID: 34791418


708. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab318. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab318.

Evolutionary Processes in the Emergence and Recent Spread of the Syphilis Agent, 
Treponema pallidum.

Pla-Díaz M(1)(2), Sánchez-Busó L(3), Giacani L(4)(5), Šmajs D(6), Bosshard 
PP(7), Bagheri HC(8), Schuenemann VJ(9), Nieselt K(10), Arora N(11)(12), 
González-Candelas F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Unidad Mixta Infección y Salud Pública FISABIO, Universidad de 
Valencia-I2SysBio, Valencia, Spain.
(2)CIBER in Epidemiology and Public Health, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Genomics and Health Area, Foundation for the Promotion of Health and 
Biomedical Research in the Valencian Community (FISABIO-Public Health), 
Valencia, Spain.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(8)Repsol Technology Center, Móstoles, Spain.
(9)Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(10)Center for Bioinformatics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(11)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(12)Zurich Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

The incidence of syphilis has risen worldwide in the last decade in spite of 
being an easily treated infection. The causative agent of this sexually 
transmitted disease is the bacterium Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum 
(TPA), very closely related to subsp. pertenue (TPE) and endemicum (TEN), 
responsible for the human treponematoses yaws and bejel, respectively. Although 
much focus has been placed on the question of the spatial and temporary origins 
of TPA, the processes driving the evolution and epidemiological spread of TPA 
since its divergence from TPE and TEN are not well understood. Here, we 
investigate the effects of recombination and selection as forces of genetic 
diversity and differentiation acting during the evolution of T. pallidum 
subspecies. Using a custom-tailored procedure, named phylogenetic incongruence 
method, with 75 complete genome sequences, we found strong evidence for 
recombination among the T. pallidum subspecies, involving 12 genes and 21 
events. In most cases, only one recombination event per gene was detected and 
all but one event corresponded to intersubspecies transfers, from TPE/TEN to 
TPA. We found a clear signal of natural selection acting on the recombinant 
genes, which is more intense in their recombinant regions. The phylogenetic 
location of the recombination events detected and the functional role of the 
genes with signals of positive selection suggest that these evolutionary 
processes had a key role in the evolution and recent expansion of the syphilis 
bacteria and significant implications for the selection of vaccine candidates 
and the design of a broadly protective syphilis vaccine.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab318
PMCID: PMC8789261
PMID: 34791386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


709. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab316. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab316.

The Complex History of Genome Duplication and Hybridization in North American 
Gray Treefrogs.

Booker WW(1), Gerhardt HC(2), Lemmon AR(3), Ptacek MB(4), Hassinger ATB(5), 
Schul J(2), Lemmon EM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, 
USA.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Scientific Computing, Florida State University, Tallahassee, 
FL, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC, USA.
(5)Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Organismal Biology, Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Polyploid speciation has played an important role in evolutionary history across 
the tree of life, yet there remain large gaps in our understanding of how 
polyploid species form and persist. Although systematic studies have been 
conducted in numerous polyploid complexes, recent advances in sequencing 
technology have demonstrated that conclusions from data-limited studies may be 
spurious and misleading. The North American gray treefrog complex, consisting of 
the diploid Hyla chrysoscelis and the tetraploid H. versicolor, has long been 
used as a model system in a variety of biological fields, yet all taxonomic 
studies to date were conducted with only a few loci from nuclear and 
mitochondrial genomes. Here, we utilized anchored hybrid enrichment and 
high-throughput sequencing to capture hundreds of loci along with whole 
mitochondrial genomes to investigate the evolutionary history of this complex. 
We used several phylogenetic and population genetic methods, including 
coalescent simulations and testing of polyploid speciation models with 
approximate Bayesian computation, to determine that H. versicolor was most 
likely formed via autopolyploidization from a now extinct lineage of H. 
chrysoscelis. We also uncovered evidence of significant hybridization between 
diploids and tetraploids where they co-occur, and show that historical 
hybridization between these groups led to the re-formation of distinct polyploid 
lineages following the initial whole-genome duplication event. Our study 
indicates that a wide variety of methods and explicit model testing of polyploid 
histories can greatly facilitate efforts to uncover the evolutionary history of 
polyploid complexes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab316
PMCID: PMC8826561
PMID: 34791374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


710. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab327. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab327.

The Emergence of the Spike Furin Cleavage Site in SARS-CoV-2.

Chan YA(1), Zhan SH(2).

Author information:
(1)Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Zoology & Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Compared with other SARS-related coronaviruses (SARSr-CoVs), SARS-CoV-2 
possesses a unique furin cleavage site (FCS) in its spike. This has stimulated 
discussion pertaining to the origin of SARS-CoV-2 because the FCS has been 
observed to be under strong selective pressure in humans and confers the 
enhanced ability to infect some cell types and induce cell-cell fusion. 
Furthermore, scientists have demonstrated interest in studying novel cleavage 
sites by introducing them into SARSr-CoVs. We review what is known about the 
SARS-CoV-2 FCS in the context of its pathogenesis, origin, and how future 
wildlife coronavirus sampling may alter the interpretation of existing data.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab327
PMCID: PMC8689951
PMID: 34788836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


711. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab326. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab326.

Variation in Release Factor Abundance Is Not Needed to Explain Trends in 
Bacterial Stop Codon Usage.

Ho AT(1), Hurst LD(1).

Author information:
(1)Milner Centre for Evolution, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

In bacteria stop codons are recognized by one of two class I release factors 
(RF1) recognizing TAG, RF2 recognizing TGA, and TAA being recognized by both. 
Variation across bacteria in the relative abundance of RF1 and RF2 is thus 
hypothesized to select for different TGA/TAG usage. This has been supported by 
correlations between TAG:TGA ratios and RF1:RF2 ratios across multiple bacterial 
species, potentially also explaining why TAG usage is approximately constant 
despite extensive variation in GC content. It is, however, possible that stop 
codon trends are determined by other forces and that RF ratios adapt to stop 
codon usage, rather than vice versa. Here, we determine which direction of the 
causal arrow is the more parsimonious. Our results support the notion that 
RF1/RF2 ratios become adapted to stop codon usage as the same trends, notably 
the anomalous TAG behavior, are seen in contexts where RF1:RF2 ratios cannot be, 
or are unlikely to be, causative, that is, at 3'untranslated sites never used 
for translation termination, in intragenomic analyses, and across archaeal 
species (that possess only one RF1). We conclude that specifics of RF biology 
are unlikely to fully explain TGA/TAG relative usage. We discuss why the causal 
relationships for the evolution of synonymous stop codon usage might be 
different from those affecting synonymous sense codon usage, noting that 
transitions between TGA and TAG require two-point mutations one of which is 
likely to be deleterious.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab326
PMCID: PMC8789281
PMID: 34751397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


712. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab321. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab321.

Modeling Sequence-Space Exploration and Emergence of Epistatic Signals in 
Protein Evolution.

Bisardi M(1)(2), Rodriguez-Rivas J(2), Zamponi F(1), Weigt M(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Physique de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, ENS, Université PSL, 
CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(2)Biologie Computationnelle et Quantitative LCQB, Institut de Biologie Paris 
Seine, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.

During their evolution, proteins explore sequence space via an interplay between 
random mutations and phenotypic selection. Here, we build upon recent progress 
in reconstructing data-driven fitness landscapes for families of homologous 
proteins, to propose stochastic models of experimental protein evolution. These 
models predict quantitatively important features of experimentally evolved 
sequence libraries, like fitness distributions and position-specific mutational 
spectra. They also allow us to efficiently simulate sequence libraries for a 
vast array of combinations of experimental parameters like sequence divergence, 
selection strength, and library size. We showcase the potential of the approach 
in reanalyzing two recent experiments to determine protein structure from 
signals of epistasis emerging in experimental sequence libraries. To be 
detectable, these signals require sufficiently large and sufficiently diverged 
libraries. Our modeling framework offers a quantitative explanation for 
different outcomes of recently published experiments. Furthermore, we can 
forecast the outcome of time- and resource-intensive evolution experiments, 
opening thereby a way to computationally optimize experimental protocols.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab321
PMCID: PMC8789065
PMID: 34751386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


713. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab322. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab322.

Molluskan Dorsal-Ventral Patterning Relying on BMP2/4 and Chordin Provides 
Insights into Spiralian Development and Evolution.

Tan S(1)(2)(3), Huan P(1)(2)(3), Liu B(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS and Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, 
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Pilot National Laboratory 
for Marine Science and Technology (Qingdao), Qingdao, China.
(3)Center for Ocean Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China.

Although a conserved mechanism relying on BMP2/4 and Chordin is suggested for 
animal dorsal-ventral (DV) patterning, this mechanism has not been reported in 
spiralians, one of the three major clades of bilaterians. Studies on limited 
spiralian representatives have suggested markedly diverse DV patterning 
mechanisms, a considerable number of which no longer deploy BMP signaling. Here, 
we showed that BMP2/4 and Chordin regulate DV patterning in the mollusk Lottia 
goshimai, which was predicted in spiralians but not previously reported. In the 
context of the diverse reports in spiralians, it conversely represents a 
relatively unusual case. We showed that BMP2/4 and Chordin coordinate to mediate 
signaling from the D-quadrant organizer to induce the DV axis, and Chordin 
relays the symmetry-breaking information from the organizer. Further 
investigations on L. goshimai embryos with impaired DV patterning suggested 
roles of BMP signaling in regulating the behavior of the blastopore and the 
organization of the nervous system. These findings provide insights into the 
evolution of animal DV patterning and the unique development mode of spiralians 
driven by the D-quadrant organizer.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab322
PMCID: PMC8789067
PMID: 34751376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


714. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab323. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab323.

Histone H3K27 Methylation Perturbs Transcriptional Robustness and Underpins 
Dispensability of Highly Conserved Genes in Fungi.

Moser Tralamazza S(1)(2), Nanchira Abraham L(1), Reyes-Avila CS(1), Corrêa B(2), 
Croll D(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics, Institute of Biology, University of 
Neuchatel, Neuchatel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Epigenetic modifications are key regulators of gene expression and underpin 
genome integrity. Yet, how epigenetic changes affect the evolution and 
transcriptional robustness of genes remains largely unknown. Here, we show how 
the repressive histone mark H3K27me3 underpins the trajectory of highly 
conserved genes in fungi. We first performed transcriptomic profiling on closely 
related species of the plant pathogen Fusarium graminearum species complex. We 
determined transcriptional responsiveness of genes across environmental 
conditions to determine expression robustness. To infer evolutionary 
conservation, we used a framework of 23 species across the Fusarium genus 
including three species covered with histone methylation data. Gene expression 
variation is negatively correlated with gene conservation confirming that highly 
conserved genes show higher expression robustness. In contrast, genes marked by 
H3K27me3 do not show such associations. Furthermore, highly conserved genes 
marked by H3K27me3 encode smaller proteins, exhibit weaker codon usage bias, 
higher levels of hydrophobicity, show lower intrinsically disordered regions, 
and are enriched for functions related to regulation and membrane transport. The 
evolutionary age of conserved genes with H3K27me3 histone marks falls typically 
within the origins of the Fusarium genus. We show that highly conserved genes 
marked by H3K27me3 are more likely to be dispensable for survival during host 
infection. Lastly, we show that conserved genes exposed to repressive H3K27me3 
marks across distantly related Fusarium fungi are associated with 
transcriptional perturbation at the microevolutionary scale. In conclusion, we 
show how repressive histone marks are entangled in the evolutionary fate of 
highly conserved genes across evolutionary timescales.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab323
PMCID: PMC8789075
PMID: 34751371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


715. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab315. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab315.

Insights into the Ancient Adaptation to Intertidal Environments by Red Algae 
Based on a Genomic and Multiomics Investigation of Neoporphyra haitanensis.

Chen H(1)(2), Chu JS(3), Chen J(1), Luo Q(4), Wang H(3), Lu R(3), Zhu Z(2), Yuan 
G(3), Yi X(3), Mao Y(3), Lu C(4), Wang Z(4), Gu D(4), Jin Z(4), Zhang C(4), Weng 
Z(4), Li S(5), Yan X(2), Yang R(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(2)Marine Drugs and Biological Products Department, Ningbo Institute of 
Oceanography, Ningbo, China.
(3)Wuhan Frasergen Bioinformatics Co. Ltd., Wuhan, China.
(4)Collaborative Innovation Center for Zhejiang Marine High-efficiency and 
Healthy Aquaculture, Ningbo University, Ningbo, China.
(5)Ningbo Customs Technology Center, Ningbo, China.

Colonization of land from marine environments was a major transition for 
biological life on Earth, and intertidal adaptation was a key evolutionary event 
in the transition from marine- to land-based lifestyles. Multicellular 
intertidal red algae exhibit the earliest, systematic, and successful adaptation 
to intertidal environments, with Porphyra sensu lato (Bangiales, Rhodophyta) 
being a typical example. Here, a chromosome-level 49.67 Mb genome for 
Neoporphyra haitanensis comprising 9,496 gene loci is described based on 
metagenome-Hi-C-assisted whole-genome assembly, which allowed the isolation of 
epiphytic bacterial genome sequences from a seaweed genome for the first time. 
The compact, function-rich N. haitanensis genome revealed that ancestral 
lineages of red algae share common horizontal gene transfer events and close 
relationships with epiphytic bacterial populations. Specifically, the ancestor 
of N. haitanensis obtained unique lipoxygenase family genes from bacteria for 
complex chemical defense, carbonic anhydrases for survival in shell-borne 
conchocelis lifestyle stages, and numerous genes involved in stress tolerance. 
Combined proteomic, transcriptomic, and metabolomic analyses revealed complex 
regulation of rapid responses to intertidal dehydration/rehydration cycling 
within N. haitanensis. These adaptations include rapid regulation of its 
photosynthetic system, a readily available capacity to utilize ribosomal stores, 
increased methylation activity to rapidly synthesize proteins, and a strong 
anti-oxidation system to dissipate excess redox energy upon exposure to air. 
These novel insights into the unique adaptations of red algae to intertidal 
lifestyles inform our understanding of adaptations to intertidal ecosystems and 
the unique evolutionary steps required for intertidal colonization by biological 
life.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab315
PMCID: PMC8752119
PMID: 34730826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


716. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):msab317. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab317.

Citrullination Was Introduced into Animals by Horizontal Gene Transfer from 
Cyanobacteria.

Cummings TFM(1), Gori K(2), Sanchez-Pulido L(1), Gavriilidis G(1), Moi 
D(3)(4)(5), Wilson AR(1), Murchison E(2), Dessimoz C(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Ponting 
CP(1), Christophorou MA(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Transmissible Cancer Group, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(4)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(5)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Genetics Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Epigenetics Department, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Protein posttranslational modifications add great sophistication to biological 
systems. Citrullination, a key regulatory mechanism in human physiology and 
pathophysiology, is enigmatic from an evolutionary perspective. Although the 
citrullinating enzymes peptidylarginine deiminases (PADIs) are ubiquitous across 
vertebrates, they are absent from yeast, worms, and flies. Based on this 
distribution PADIs were proposed to have been horizontally transferred, but this 
has been contested. Here, we map the evolutionary trajectory of PADIs into the 
animal lineage. We present strong phylogenetic support for a clade encompassing 
animal and cyanobacterial PADIs that excludes fungal and other bacterial 
homologs. The animal and cyanobacterial PADI proteins share functionally 
relevant primary and tertiary synapomorphic sequences that are distinct from a 
second PADI type present in fungi and actinobacteria. Molecular clock 
calculations and sequence divergence analyses using the fossil record estimate 
the last common ancestor of the cyanobacterial and animal PADIs to be less than 
1 billion years old. Additionally, under an assumption of vertical descent, PADI 
sequence change during this evolutionary time frame is anachronistically low, 
even when compared with products of likely endosymbiont gene transfer, 
mitochondrial proteins, and some of the most highly conserved sequences in life. 
The consilience of evidence indicates that PADIs were introduced from 
cyanobacteria into animals by horizontal gene transfer (HGT). The ancestral 
cyanobacterial PADI is enzymatically active and can citrullinate eukaryotic 
proteins, suggesting that the PADI HGT event introduced a new catalytic 
capability into the regulatory repertoire of animals. This study reveals the 
unusual evolution of a pleiotropic protein modification.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab317
PMCID: PMC8826395
PMID: 34730808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


717. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab310. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab310.

Genome-Wide Reconstruction of Rediploidization Following Autopolyploidization 
across One Hundred Million Years of Salmonid Evolution.

Gundappa MK(1)(2), To TH(3), Grønvold L(3), Martin SAM(2), Lien S(3), Geist 
J(4), Hazlerigg D(5), Sandve SR(3), Macqueen DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, The 
University of Edinburgh, Midlothian, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Department of Animal and Aquacultural Sciences, Faculty of Biosciences, 
Centre for Integrative Genetics (CIGENE), Norwegian University of Life Sciences, 
Ås, Norway.
(4)Aquatic Systems Biology Unit, TUM School of Life Sciences, Technical 
University of Munich, Freising, Germany.
(5)Department of Arctic and Marine Biology, Faculty of BioSciences Fisheries & 
Economy, University of Tromsø, Norway.

The long-term evolutionary impacts of whole-genome duplication (WGD) are 
strongly influenced by the ensuing rediploidization process. Following 
autopolyploidization, rediploidization involves a transition from tetraploid to 
diploid meiotic pairing, allowing duplicated genes (ohnologs) to diverge 
genetically and functionally. Our understanding of autopolyploid 
rediploidization has been informed by a WGD event ancestral to salmonid fishes, 
where large genomic regions are characterized by temporally delayed 
rediploidization, allowing lineage-specific ohnolog sequence divergence in the 
major salmonid clades. Here, we investigate the long-term outcomes of 
autopolyploid rediploidization at genome-wide resolution, exploiting a recent 
"explosion" of salmonid genome assemblies, including a new genome sequence for 
the huchen (Hucho hucho). We developed a genome alignment approach to capture 
duplicated regions across multiple species, allowing us to create 121,864 
phylogenetic trees describing genome-wide ohnolog divergence across salmonid 
evolution. Using molecular clock analysis, we show that 61% of the ancestral 
salmonid genome experienced an initial "wave" of rediploidization in the late 
Cretaceous (85-106 Ma). This was followed by a period of relative genomic stasis 
lasting 17-39 My, where much of the genome remained tetraploid. A second 
rediploidization wave began in the early Eocene and proceeded alongside species 
diversification, generating predictable patterns of lineage-specific ohnolog 
divergence, scaling in complexity with the number of speciation events. Using 
gene set enrichment, gene expression, and codon-based selection analyses, we 
provide insights into potential functional outcomes of delayed rediploidization. 
This study enhances our understanding of delayed autopolyploid rediploidization 
and has broad implications for future studies of WGD events.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab310
PMCID: PMC8760942
PMID: 34718723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


718. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Mar 2;39(3):msab313. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab313.

Similarity-Based Analysis of Allele Frequency Distribution among Multiple 
Populations Identifies Adaptive Genomic Structural Variants.

Saitou M(1)(2), Masuda N(3)(4), Gokcumen O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University at Buffalo, State University of 
New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Section of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, The University of 
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics, University at Buffalo, State University of New 
York, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(4)Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering Program, University at 
Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA.

Structural variants have a considerable impact on human genomic diversity. 
However, their evolutionary history remains mostly unexplored. Here, we 
developed a new method to identify potentially adaptive structural variants 
based on a similarity-based analysis that incorporates genotype frequency data 
from 26 populations simultaneously. Using this method, we analyzed 57,629 
structural variants and identified 576 structural variants that show unusual 
population differentiation. Of these putatively adaptive structural variants, we 
further showed that 24 variants are multiallelic and overlap with coding 
sequences, and 20 variants are significantly associated with GWAS traits. Closer 
inspection of the haplotypic variation associated with these putatively adaptive 
and functional structural variants reveals deviations from neutral expectations 
due to: 1) population differentiation of rapidly evolving multiallelic variants, 
2) incomplete sweeps, and 3) recent population-specific negative selection. 
Overall, our study provides new methodological insights, documents hundreds of 
putatively adaptive variants, and introduces evolutionary models that may better 
explain the complex evolution of structural variants.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab313
PMCID: PMC8896759
PMID: 34718708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


719. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab314. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab314.

Spatiotemporal Evolution of the Global Species Diversity of Rhododendron.

Xia XM(1)(2), Yang MQ(1), Li CL(1)(2), Huang SX(1)(2), Jin WT(1), Shen TT(1), 
Wang F(3), Li XH(4), Yoichi W(5), Zhang LH(4), Zheng YR(3)(6), Wang XQ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Systematic and Evolutionary Botany, Institute of 
Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)West China Subalpine Botanical Garden, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Sichuan, China.
(4)Lushan Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Jiangxi, China.
(5)Graduate School of Horticulture, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Plant Resources, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Evolutionary radiation is a widely recognized mode of species diversification, 
but its underlying mechanisms have not been unambiguously resolved for 
species-rich cosmopolitan plant genera. In particular, it remains largely 
unknown how biological and environmental factors have jointly driven its 
occurrence in specific regions. Here, we use Rhododendron, the largest genus of 
woody plants in the Northern Hemisphere, to investigate how geographic and 
climatic factors, as well as functional traits, worked together to trigger plant 
evolutionary radiations and shape the global patterns of species richness based 
on a solid species phylogeny. Using 3,437 orthologous nuclear genes, we 
reconstructed the first highly supported and dated backbone phylogeny of 
Rhododendron comprising 200 species that represent all subgenera, sections, and 
nearly all multispecies subsections, and found that most extant species 
originated by evolutionary radiations when the genus migrated southward from 
circumboreal areas to tropical/subtropical mountains, showing rapid increases of 
both net diversification rate and evolutionary rate of environmental factors in 
the Miocene. We also found that the geographically uneven diversification of 
Rhododendron led to a much higher diversity in Asia than in other continents, 
which was mainly driven by two environmental variables, that is, elevation range 
and annual precipitation, and were further strengthened by the adaptation of 
leaf functional traits. Our study provides a good example of integrating 
phylogenomic and ecological analyses in deciphering the mechanisms of plant 
evolutionary radiations, and sheds new light on how the intensification of the 
Asian monsoon has driven evolutionary radiations in large plant genera of the 
Himalaya-Hengduan Mountains.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab314
PMCID: PMC8760938
PMID: 34718707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


720. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab311. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab311.

Population Genomics of Wall Lizards Reflects the Dynamic History of the 
Mediterranean Basin.

Yang W(1), Feiner N(1), Salvi D(2), Laakkonen H(1), Jablonski D(3), Pinho C(4), 
Carretero MA(4)(5), Sacchi R(6), Zuffi MAL(7), Scali S(8), Plavos K(1), Pafilis 
P(9), Poulakakis N(10)(11)(12), Lymberakis P(10), Jandzik D(3), Schulte U(13), 
Aubret F(14)(15), Badiane A(16), Perez I de Lanuza G(17), Abalos J(17), While 
GM(18), Uller T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Health, Life and Environmental Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, Coppito, L'Aquila, Italy.
(3)Department of Zoology, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(4)CIBIO/InBIO Research Centre in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, 
Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal.
(5)Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(6)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
(7)Museum Natural History, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(8)Museum of Natural History of Milan, Milano, Italy.
(9)National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of Science, Faculty of 
Biology, Athens, Greece.
(10)Natural History Museum of Crete, School of Sciences and Engineering, 
University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(11)Biology Department, School of Sciences and Engineering, University of Crete, 
Voutes University Campus, Heraklion, Greece.
(12)Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas (FORTH), Institute of 
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology (IMBB), Heraklion, Greece.
(13)Büro für Faunistische Gutachten-Dr. Ulrich Schulte, Kaiserstraße 2, 
Borgholzhausen, Germany.
(14)Station d'Ecologie Théorique et Expérimentale, CNRS, Moulis, France.
(15)School of Molecular and Life Sciences, Curtin University, Perth, Australia.
(16)IMBE, Aix-Marseille Université, Avignon Université, CNRS, IRD, Marseille, 
France.
(17)Institut Cavanilles de Biodiversitat i Biologia Evolutiva, Universitat de 
València, Valencia, Spain.
(18)School of Natural Sciences, University of Tasmania, Sandy Bay, Tasmania, 
Australia.

The Mediterranean Basin has experienced extensive change in geology and climate 
over the past six million years. Yet, the relative importance of key geological 
events for the distribution and genetic structure of the Mediterranean fauna 
remains poorly understood. Here, we use population genomic and phylogenomic 
analyses to establish the evolutionary history and genetic structure of common 
wall lizards (Podarcis muralis). This species is particularly informative 
because, in contrast to other Mediterranean lizards, it is widespread across the 
Iberian, Italian, and Balkan Peninsulas, and in extra-Mediterranean regions. We 
found strong support for six major lineages within P. muralis, which were 
largely discordant with the phylogenetic relationship of mitochondrial DNA. The 
most recent common ancestor of extant P. muralis was likely distributed in the 
Italian Peninsula, and experienced an "Out-of-Italy" expansion following the 
Messinian salinity crisis (∼5 Mya), resulting in the differentiation into the 
extant lineages on the Iberian, Italian, and Balkan Peninsulas. Introgression 
analysis revealed that both inter- and intraspecific gene flows have been 
pervasive throughout the evolutionary history of P. muralis. For example, the 
Southern Italy lineage has a hybrid origin, formed through admixture between the 
Central Italy lineage and an ancient lineage that was the sister to all other 
P. muralis. More recent genetic differentiation is associated with the onset of 
the Quaternary glaciations, which influenced population dynamics and genetic 
diversity of contemporary lineages. These results demonstrate the pervasive role 
of Mediterranean geology and climate for the evolutionary history and population 
genetic structure of extant species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab311
PMCID: PMC8760935
PMID: 34718699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


721. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab312. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab312.

Phylogenetic Articulation of Uric Acid Evolution in Mammals and How It Informs a 
Therapeutic Uricase.

Li Z(1), Hoshino Y(1), Tran L(1), Gaucher EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA.

The role of uric acid during primate evolution has remained elusive ever since 
it was discovered over 100 years ago that humans have unusually high levels of 
the small molecule in our serum. It has been difficult to generate a neutral or 
adaptive explanation in part because the uricase enzyme evolved to become a 
pseudogene in apes thus masking typical signals of sequence evolution. Adding to 
the difficulty is a lack of clarity on the functional role of uric acid in apes. 
One popular hypothesis proposes that uric acid is a potent antioxidant that 
increased in concentration to compensate for the lack of vitamin C synthesis in 
primate species ∼65 Ma. Here, we have expanded on our previous work with 
resurrected ancient uricase proteins to better resolve the reshaping of uricase 
enzymatic activity prior to ape evolution. Our results suggest that the pivotal 
death-knell to uricase activity occurred between 20 and 30 Ma despite small 
sequential modifications to its catalytic efficiency for the tens of millions of 
years since primates lost their ability to synthesize vitamin C, and thus the 
two appear uncorrelated. We also use this opportunity to demonstrate how 
molecular evolution can contribute to biomedicine by presenting ancient uricases 
to human immune cells that assay for innate reactivity against foreign antigens. 
A highly stable and highly catalytic ancient uricase is shown to elicit a lower 
immune response in more human haplotypes than other uricases currently in 
therapeutic development.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab312
PMCID: PMC8760943
PMID: 34718698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


722. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5836. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab275.

Erratum to: Conservation of Aging and Cancer Epigenetic Signatures across Human 
and Mouse.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3415-3435.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab275
PMCID: PMC8662589
PMID: 34695203


723. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab300. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab300.

Lower Statistical Support with Larger Data Sets: Insights from the Ochrophyta 
Radiation.

Di Franco A(1), Baurain D(2), Glöckner G(3), Melkonian M(4), Philippe H(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Station d'Ecologie Théorique et Expérimentale de Moulis, UMR CNRS 5321, 
Moulis, France.
(2)InBioS-PhytoSYSTEMS, Unité de Phylogénomique des Eucaryotes, Université de 
Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Institut für Biochemie I, Medizinische Fakultät, Universität zu Köln, Köln, 
Germany.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Integrative Bioinformatics, 
Cologne, Germany.
(5)Département de Biochimie, Centre Robert-Cedergren, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, QC, Canada.

It is commonly assumed that increasing the number of characters has the 
potential to resolve evolutionary radiations. Here, we studied photosynthetic 
stramenopiles (Ochrophyta) using alignments of heterogeneous origin 
mitochondrion, plastid, and nucleus. Surprisingly while statistical support for 
the relationships between the six major Ochrophyta lineages increases when 
comparing the mitochondrion (6,762 sites) and plastid (21,692 sites) trees, it 
decreases in the nuclear (209,105 sites) tree. Statistical support is not simply 
related to the data set size but also to the quantity of phylogenetic signal 
available at each position and our ability to extract it. Here, we show that 
this ability for current phylogenetic methods is limited, because conflicting 
results were obtained when varying taxon sampling. Even though the use of a 
better fitting model improved signal extraction and reduced the observed 
conflicts, the plastid data set provided higher statistical support for the 
ochrophyte radiation than the larger nucleus data set. We propose that the 
higher support observed in the plastid tree is due to an acceleration of the 
evolutionary rate in one short deep internal branch, implying that more 
phylogenetic signal per position is available to resolve the Ochrophyta 
radiation in the plastid than in the nuclear data set. Our work therefore 
suggests that, in order to resolve radiations, beyond the obvious use of data 
sets with more positions, we need to continue developing models of sequence 
evolution that better extract the phylogenetic signal and design methods to 
search for genes/characters that contain more signal specifically for short 
internal branches.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab300
PMCID: PMC8763130
PMID: 34694402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


724. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab309. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab309.

A Mutation-Selection Model of Protein Evolution under Persistent Positive 
Selection.

Tamuri AU(1)(2), Dos Reis M(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Advanced Research Computing, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(2)EMBL-EBI, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Biological and Behavioural Sciences, Queen Mary University of 
London, London, United Kingdom.

We use first principles of population genetics to model the evolution of 
proteins under persistent positive selection (PPS). PPS may occur when organisms 
are subjected to persistent environmental change, during adaptive radiations, or 
in host-pathogen interactions. Our mutation-selection model indicates protein 
evolution under PPS is an irreversible Markov process, and thus proteins under 
PPS show a strongly asymmetrical distribution of selection coefficients among 
amino acid substitutions. Our model shows the criteria ω>1 (where ω is the ratio 
of nonsynonymous over synonymous codon substitution rates) to detect positive 
selection is conservative and indeed arbitrary, because in real proteins many 
mutations are highly deleterious and are removed by selection even at positively 
selected sites. We use a penalized-likelihood implementation of the PPS model to 
successfully detect PPS in plant RuBisCO and influenza HA proteins. By directly 
estimating selection coefficients at protein sites, our inference procedure 
bypasses the need for using ω as a surrogate measure of selection and improves 
our ability to detect molecular adaptation in proteins.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab309
PMCID: PMC8760937
PMID: 34694387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


725. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab308. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab308.

Dead-End Hybridization in Walnut Trees Revealed by Large-Scale Genomic Sequence 
Data.

Zhang WP(1), Cao L(1), Lin XR(1), Ding YM(1), Liang Y(1), Zhang DY(1), Pang 
EL(1), Renner SS(2), Bai WN(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Processes and Resource Ecology and 
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity Science and Ecological 
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Biology, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO, USA.

Although hybridization plays a large role in speciation, some unknown fraction 
of hybrid individuals never reproduces, instead remaining as genetic dead-ends. 
We investigated a morphologically distinct and culturally important Chinese 
walnut, Juglans hopeiensis, suspected to have arisen from hybridization of 
Persian walnut (J. regia) with Asian butternuts (J. cathayensis, J. mandshurica, 
and hybrids between J. cathayensis and J. mandshurica). Based on 151 
whole-genome sequences of the relevant taxa, we discovered that all J. 
hopeiensis individuals are first-generation hybrids, with the time for the onset 
of gene flow estimated as 370,000 years, implying both strong postzygotic 
barriers and the presence of J. regia in China by that time. Six inversion 
regions enriched for genes associated with pollen germination and pollen tube 
growth may be involved in the postzygotic barriers that prevent sexual 
reproduction in the hybrids. Despite its long-recurrent origination and distinct 
traits, J. hopeiensis does not appear on the way to speciation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab308
PMCID: PMC8760940
PMID: 34687315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


726. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab305. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab305.

Convergent Loss of Chemoreceptors across Independent Origins of Slave-Making in 
Ants.

Jongepier E(1)(2), Séguret A(1), Labutin A(1), Feldmeyer B(3), Gstöttl C(4), 
Foitzik S(5), Heinze J(4), Bornberg-Bauer E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Evolution and Biodiversity, Westfälische Wilhelms University, 
Münster, Germany.
(2)Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Molecular Ecology Group, Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre, Frankfurt 
am Main, Germany.
(4)Institute for Zoology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Organismic and Molecular Evolution, Johannes Gutenberg 
University, Mainz, Germany.

The evolution of an obligate parasitic lifestyle often leads to the reduction of 
morphological and physiological traits, which may be accompanied by loss of 
genes and functions. Slave-making ants are social parasites that exploit the 
work force of closely related ant species for social behaviors such as brood 
care and foraging. Recent divergence between these social parasites and their 
hosts enables comparative studies of gene family evolution. We sequenced the 
genomes of eight ant species, representing three independent origins of ant 
slavery. During the evolution of eusociality, chemoreceptor genes multiplied due 
to the importance of chemical communication in insect societies. We investigated 
the evolutionary fate of these chemoreceptors and found that slave-making ant 
genomes harbored only half as many gustatory receptors as their hosts', 
potentially mirroring the outsourcing of foraging tasks to host workers. In 
addition, parasites had fewer odorant receptors and their loss shows striking 
patterns of convergence across independent origins of parasitism, in particular 
in orthologs often implicated in sociality like the 9-exon odorant receptors. 
These convergent losses represent a rare case of convergent molecular evolution 
at the level of individual genes. Thus, evolution can operate in a way that is 
both repeatable and reversible when independent ant lineages lose important 
social traits during the transition to a parasitic lifestyle.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab305
PMCID: PMC8760941
PMID: 34668533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


727. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab303. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab303.

Positive Selection and Horizontal Gene Transfer in the Genome of a Male-Killing 
Wolbachia.

Hill T(1)(2), Unckless RL(3), Perlmutter JI(3).

Author information:
(1)NIAID Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource, National Institutes of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Advanced Biomedical Computational Science, Frederick National Laboratory for 
Cancer Research, Frederick, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA.

Wolbachia are a genus of widespread bacterial endosymbionts in which some 
strains can hijack or manipulate arthropod host reproduction. Male killing is 
one such manipulation in which these maternally transmitted bacteria benefit 
surviving daughters in part by removing competition with the sons for scarce 
resources. Despite previous findings of interesting genome features of microbial 
sex ratio distorters, the population genomics of male-killers remain largely 
uncharacterized. Here, we uncover several unique features of the genome and 
population genomics of four Arizonan populations of a male-killing Wolbachia 
strain, wInn, that infects mushroom-feeding Drosophila innubila. We first 
compared the wInn genome with other closely related Wolbachia genomes of 
Drosophila hosts in terms of genome content and confirm that the wInn genome is 
largely similar in overall gene content to the wMel strain infecting D. 
melanogaster. However, it also contains many unique genes and repetitive genetic 
elements that indicate lateral gene transfers between wInn and non-Drosophila 
eukaryotes. We also find that, in line with literature precedent, genes in the 
Wolbachia prophage and Octomom regions are under positive selection. Of all the 
genes under positive selection, many also show evidence of recent horizontal 
transfer among Wolbachia symbiont genomes. These dynamics of selection and 
horizontal gene transfer across the genomes of several Wolbachia strains and 
diverse host species may be important underlying factors in Wolbachia's success 
as a male-killer of divergent host species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab303
PMCID: PMC8763111
PMID: 34662426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


728. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab306. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab306.

Co-evolutionary Signals Identify Burkholderia pseudomallei Survival Strategies 
in a Hostile Environment.

Chewapreecha C(1)(2)(3), Pensar J(4)(5), Chattagul S(6)(7), Pesonen M(8), 
Sangphukieo A(3), Boonklang P(1), Potisap C(6), Koosakulnirand S(9), Feil 
EJ(10), Dunachie S(1)(11), Chantratita N(1)(9), Limmathurotsakul D(1)(11), 
Peacock SJ(12), Day NPJ(1)(11), Parkhill J(13), Thomson NR(2), Sermswan 
RW(6)(7), Corander J(2)(5)(14).

Author information:
(1)Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Parasites and Microbes Programme, Wellcome Sanger Insitute, Hinxton, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Bioinformatics & Systems Biology Program, King Mongkut's University of 
Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Department of Mathematics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Helsinki Institute of Information 
Technology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Melioidosis Research Center, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon 
Kaen, Thailand.
(8)Oslo Centre for Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, 
Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(10)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, The Milner Centre for Evolution, 
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(11)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(12)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(13)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(14)Department of Biostatistics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

The soil bacterium Burkholderia pseudomallei is the causative agent of 
melioidosis and a significant cause of human morbidity and mortality in many 
tropical and subtropical countries. The species notoriously survives harsh 
environmental conditions but the genetic architecture for these adaptations 
remains unclear. Here we employed a powerful combination of genome-wide 
epistasis and co-selection studies (2,011 genomes), condition-wide transcriptome 
analyses (82 diverse conditions), and a gene knockout assay to uncover signals 
of "co-selection"-that is a combination of genetic markers that have been 
repeatedly selected together through B. pseudomallei evolution. These enabled us 
to identify 13,061 mutation pairs under co-selection in distinct genes and 
noncoding RNA. Genes under co-selection displayed marked expression correlation 
when B. pseudomallei was subjected to physical stress conditions, highlighting 
the conditions as one of the major evolutionary driving forces for this 
bacterium. We identified a putative adhesin (BPSL1661) as a hub of co-selection 
signals, experimentally confirmed a BPSL1661 role under nutrient deprivation, 
and explored the functional basis of co-selection gene network surrounding 
BPSL1661 in facilitating the bacterial survival under nutrient depletion. Our 
findings suggest that nutrient-limited conditions have been the common selection 
pressure acting on this species, and allelic variation of BPSL1661 may have 
promoted B. pseudomallei survival during harsh environmental conditions by 
facilitating bacterial adherence to different surfaces, cells, or living hosts.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab306
PMCID: PMC8760936
PMID: 34662416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


729. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab307. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab307.

Modular Evolution of the Drosophila Metabolome.

Harrison BR(1), Hoffman JM(2), Samuelson A(3), Raftery D(4), Promislow 
DEL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Lab Medicine & Pathology, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Department of Anesthesiology & Pain Medicine, University of Washington School 
of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.

Comparative phylogenetic studies offer a powerful approach to study the 
evolution of complex traits. Although much effort has been devoted to the 
evolution of the genome and to organismal phenotypes, until now relatively 
little work has been done on the evolution of the metabolome, despite the fact 
that it is composed of the basic structural and functional building blocks of 
all organisms. Here we explore variation in metabolite levels across 50 My of 
evolution in the genus Drosophila, employing a common garden design to measure 
the metabolome within and among 11 species of Drosophila. We find that both sex 
and age have dramatic and evolutionarily conserved effects on the metabolome. We 
also find substantial evidence that many metabolite pairs covary after 
phylogenetic correction, and that such metabolome coevolution is modular. Some 
of these modules are enriched for specific biochemical pathways and show 
different evolutionary trajectories, with some showing signs of stabilizing 
selection. Both observations suggest that functional relationships may 
ultimately cause such modularity. These coevolutionary patterns also differ 
between sexes and are affected by age. We explore the relevance of modular 
evolution to fitness by associating modules with lifespan variation measured in 
the same common garden. We find several modules associated with lifespan, 
particularly in the metabolome of older flies. Oxaloacetate levels in older 
females appear to coevolve with lifespan, and a lifespan-associated module in 
older females suggests that metabolic associations could underlie 50 My of 
lifespan evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab307
PMCID: PMC8760934
PMID: 34662414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


730. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab301. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab301.

ORTHOSCOPE*: A Phylogenetic Pipeline to Infer Gene Histories from Genome-Wide 
Data.

Inoue J(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Earth Surface System Dynamics, Atmosphere and Ocean Research 
Institute, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan.

Comparative genome-scale analyses of protein-coding gene sequences are employed 
to examine evidence for whole-genome duplication and horizontal gene transfer. 
For this purpose, an orthogroup should be delineated to infer evolutionary 
history regarding each gene, and results of all orthogroup analyses need to be 
integrated to infer a genome-scale history. An orthogroup is a set of genes 
descended from a single gene in the last common ancestor of all species under 
consideration. However, such analyses confront several problems: 1) Analytical 
pipelines to infer all gene histories with methods comparing species and gene 
trees are not fully developed, and 2) without detailed analyses within 
orthogroups, evolutionary events of paralogous genes in the same orthogroup 
cannot be distinguished for genome-wide integration of results derived from 
multiple orthogroup analyses. Here I present an analytical pipeline, ORTHOSCOPE* 
(star), to infer evolutionary histories of animal/plant genes from genome-scale 
data. ORTHOSCOPE* estimates a tree for a specified gene, detects speciation/gene 
duplication events that occurred at nodes belonging to only one lineage leading 
to a species of interest, and then integrates results derived from gene trees 
estimated for all query genes in genome-wide data. Thus, ORTHOSCOPE* can be used 
to detect species nodes just after whole-genome duplications as a first step of 
comparative genomic analyses. Moreover, by examining the presence or absence of 
genes belonging to species lineages with dense taxon sampling available from the 
ORTHOSCOPE web version, ORTHOSCOPE* can detect genes lost in specific lineages 
and horizontal gene transfers. This pipeline is available at 
https://github.com/jun-inoue/ORTHOSCOPE_STAR.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab301
PMCID: PMC8763121
PMID: 34662403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


731. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab304. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab304.

Detection of Neanderthal Adaptively Introgressed Genetic Variants That Modulate 
Reporter Gene Expression in Human Immune Cells.

Jagoda E(1), Xue JR(2)(3), Reilly SK(2)(3), Dannemann M(4)(5), Racimo F(6), 
Huerta-Sanchez E(7)(8), Sankararaman S(9)(10), Kelso J(4), Pagani L(5)(11), 
Sabeti PC(2)(3)(12)(13), Capellini TD(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Estonian Biocentre, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(6)Lundbeck GeoGenetics Centre, The Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, Providence, 
RI, USA.
(8)Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown University, Providence, RI, 
USA.
(9)Department of Computer Science, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Human Genetics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
(12)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA.

Although some variation introgressed from Neanderthals has undergone selective 
sweeps, little is known about its functional significance. We used a Massively 
Parallel Reporter Assay (MPRA) to assay 5,353 high-frequency introgressed 
variants for their ability to modulate the gene expression within 170 bp of 
endogenous sequence. We identified 2,548 variants in active putative 
cis-regulatory elements (CREs) and 292 expression-modulating variants (emVars). 
These emVars are predicted to alter the binding motifs of important immune 
transcription factors, are enriched for associations with neutrophil and white 
blood cell count, and are associated with the expression of genes that function 
in innate immune pathways including inflammatory response and antiviral defense. 
We combined the MPRA data with other data sets to identify strong candidates to 
be driver variants of positive selection including an emVar that may contribute 
to protection against severe COVID-19 response. We endogenously deleted two CREs 
containing expression-modulation variants linked to immune function, rs11624425 
and rs80317430, identifying their primary genic targets as ELMSAN1, and PAN2 and 
STAT2, respectively, three genes differentially expressed during influenza 
infection. Overall, we present the first database of experimentally identified 
expression-modulating Neanderthal-introgressed alleles contributing to potential 
immune response in modern humans.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab304
PMCID: PMC8760939
PMID: 34662402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


732. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab302. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab302.

Aging at Evolutionary Crossroads: Longitudinal Gene Co-expression Network 
Analyses of Proximal and Ultimate Causes of Aging in Bats.

Bernard G(1), Teulière J(1), Lopez P(1), Corel E(1), Lapointe FJ(2), Bapteste 
E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Systématique, Evolution, Biodiversité (ISYEB), Sorbonne 
Université, CNRS, Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, EPHE, Université des 
Antilles, Paris, France.
(2)Département de Sciences Biologiques, Complexe des Sciences, Université de 
Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.

How, when, and why do organisms, their tissues, and their cells age remain 
challenging issues, although researchers have identified multiple mechanistic 
causes of aging, and three major evolutionary theories have been developed to 
unravel the ultimate causes of organismal aging. A central hypothesis of these 
theories is that the strength of natural selection decreases with age. However, 
empirical evidence on when, why, and how organisms age is phylogenetically 
limited, especially in natural populations. Here, we developed generic 
comparisons of gene co-expression networks that quantify and dissect the 
heterogeneity of gene co-expression in conspecific individuals from different 
age-classes to provide topological evidence about some mechanical and 
fundamental causes of organismal aging. We applied this approach to investigate 
the complexity of some proximal and ultimate causes of aging phenotypes in a 
natural population of the greater mouse-eared bat Myotis myotis, a remarkably 
long-lived species given its body size and metabolic rate, with available 
longitudinal blood transcriptomes. M. myotis gene co-expression networks become 
increasingly fragmented with age, suggesting an erosion of the strength of 
natural selection and a general dysregulation of gene co-expression in aging 
bats. However, selective pressures remain sufficiently strong to allow 
successive emergence of homogeneous age-specific gene co-expression patterns, 
for at least 7 years. Thus, older individuals from long-lived species appear to 
sit at an evolutionary crossroad: as they age, they experience both a decrease 
in the strength of natural selection and a targeted selection for very specific 
biological processes, further inviting to refine a central hypothesis in 
evolutionary aging theories.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab302
PMCID: PMC8763092
PMID: 34662394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


733. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab292. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab292.

The Neighborhood of the Spike Gene Is a Hotspot for Modular Intertypic 
Homologous and Nonhomologous Recombination in Coronavirus Genomes.

Nikolaidis M(1), Markoulatos P(2), Van de Peer Y(3)(4)(5)(6), Oliver SG(7), 
Amoutzias GD(1).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 
University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
(2)Microbial Biotechnology-Molecular Bacteriology-Virology Laboratory, 
Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Thessaly, Larissa, 
Greece.
(3)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(6)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Coronaviruses (CoVs) have very large RNA viral genomes with a distinct genomic 
architecture of core and accessory open reading frames (ORFs). It is of utmost 
importance to understand their patterns and limits of homologous and 
nonhomologous recombination, because such events may affect the emergence of 
novel CoV strains, alter their host range, infection rate, tissue tropism 
pathogenicity, and their ability to escape vaccination programs. Intratypic 
recombination among closely related CoVs of the same subgenus has often been 
reported; however, the patterns and limits of genomic exchange between more 
distantly related CoV lineages (intertypic recombination) need further 
investigation. Here, we report computational/evolutionary analyses that clearly 
demonstrate a substantial ability for CoVs of different subgenera to recombine. 
Furthermore, we show that CoVs can obtain-through nonhomologous 
recombination-accessory ORFs from core ORFs, exchange accessory ORFs with 
different CoV genera, with other viruses (i.e., toroviruses, influenza C/D, 
reoviruses, rotaviruses, astroviruses) and even with hosts. Intriguingly, most 
of these radical events result from double crossovers surrounding the Spike ORF, 
thus highlighting both the instability and mobile nature of this genomic region. 
Although many such events have often occurred during the evolution of various 
CoVs, the genomic architecture of the relatively young SARS-CoV/SARS-CoV-2 
lineage so far appears to be stable.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab292
PMCID: PMC8549283
PMID: 34638137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


734. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab298. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab298.

Remarkably Low KIR and HLA Diversity in Amerindians Reveals Signatures of Strong 
Purifying Selection Shaping the Centromeric KIR Region.

Vargas LB(1), Beltrame MH(1), Ho B(2), Marin WM(2), Dandekar R(2), 
Montero-Martín G(3), Fernández-Viña MA(3), Hurtado AM(4), Hill KR(4), Tsuneto 
LT(5), Hutz MH(6), Salzano FM(6), Petzl-Erler ML(1), Hollenbach JA(2)(7), 
Augusto DG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Genética, Departamento de Genética, Universidade 
Federal do Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(2)Department of Neurology, Weill Institute for Neurosciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA, USA.
(4)School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ, USA.
(5)Departamento de Análises Clínicas, Universidade Estadual de Maringá, Maringá, 
PR, Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

The killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) recognize human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) molecules to regulate the cytotoxic and inflammatory responses of 
natural killer cells. KIR genes are encoded by a rapidly evolving gene family on 
chromosome 19 and present an unusual variation of presence and absence of genes 
and high allelic diversity. Although many studies have associated KIR 
polymorphism with susceptibility to several diseases over the last decades, the 
high-resolution allele-level haplotypes have only recently started to be 
described in populations. Here, we use a highly innovative custom 
next-generation sequencing method that provides a state-of-art characterization 
of KIR and HLA diversity in 706 individuals from eight unique South American 
populations: five Amerindian populations from Brazil (three Guarani and two 
Kaingang); one Amerindian population from Paraguay (Aché); and two urban 
populations from Southern Brazil (European and Japanese descendants from 
Curitiba). For the first time, we describe complete high-resolution KIR 
haplotypes in South American populations, exploring copy number, linkage 
disequilibrium, and KIR-HLA interactions. We show that all Amerindians analyzed 
to date exhibit the lowest numbers of KIR-HLA interactions among all described 
worldwide populations, and that 83-97% of their KIR-HLA interactions rely on a 
few HLA-C molecules. Using multiple approaches, we found signatures of strong 
purifying selection on the KIR centromeric region, which codes for the strongest 
NK cell educator receptors, possibly driven by the limited HLA diversity in 
these populations. Our study expands the current knowledge of KIR genetic 
diversity in populations to understand KIR-HLA coevolution and its impact on 
human health and survival.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab298
PMCID: PMC8763117
PMID: 34633459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


735. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab297. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab297.

Controls for Phylogeny and Robust Analysis in Pareto Task Inference.

Adler M(1), Tendler A(2), Hausser J(3), Korem Y(2), Szekely P(4), Bossel N(5), 
Hart Y(6), Karin O(2), Mayo A(2), Alon U(2).

Author information:
(1)Klarman Cell Observatory, Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute of Harvard and 
MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology Stockholm, Karolinska Institute 
and SciLifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(6)Department of Psychology Jerusalem, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, Israel.

Understanding the tradeoffs faced by organisms is a major goal of evolutionary 
biology. One of the main approaches for identifying these tradeoffs is Pareto 
task inference (ParTI). Two recent papers claim that results obtained in ParTI 
studies are spurious due to phylogenetic dependence (Mikami T, Iwasaki W. 2021. 
The flipping t-ratio test: phylogenetically informed assessment of the Pareto 
theory for phenotypic evolution. Methods Ecol Evol. 12(4):696-706) or 
hypothetical p-hacking and population-structure concerns (Sun M, Zhang J. 2021. 
Rampant false detection of adaptive phenotypic optimization by ParTI-based 
Pareto front inference. Mol Biol Evol. 38(4):1653-1664). Here, we show that 
these claims are baseless. We present a new method to control for phylogenetic 
dependence, called SibSwap, and show that published ParTI inference is robust to 
phylogenetic dependence. We show how researchers avoided p-hacking by testing 
for the robustness of preprocessing choices. We also provide new methods to 
control for population structure and detail the experimental tests of ParTI in 
systems ranging from ammonites to cancer gene expression. The methods presented 
here may help to improve future ParTI studies.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab297
PMCID: PMC8763096
PMID: 34633456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


736. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab299. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab299.

Evolutionary Implications of the RNA N6-Methyladenosine Methylome in Plants.

Miao Z(1)(2), Zhang T(1), Xie B(1), Qi Y(1), Ma C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, Center of 
Bioinformatics, College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi, 
Yangling, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biology and Genetics Improvement of Maize in Arid Area of 
Northwest Region, Ministry of Agriculture, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi, 
Yangling, China.

Epigenetic modifications play important roles in genome evolution and 
innovation. However, most analyses have focused on the evolutionary role of DNA 
modifications, and little is understood about the influence of 
posttranscriptional RNA modifications on genome evolution. To explore the 
evolutionary significance of RNA modifications, we generated transcriptome-wide 
profiles of N6-methyladenosine (m6A), the most prevalent internal modification 
of mRNA, for 13 representative plant species spanning over half a billion years 
of evolution. These data reveal the evolutionary conservation and divergence of 
m6A methylomes in plants, uncover the preference of m6A modifications on ancient 
orthologous genes, and demonstrate less m6A divergence between orthologous gene 
pairs with earlier evolutionary origins. Further investigation revealed that the 
evolutionary divergence of m6A modifications is related to sequence variation 
between homologs from whole-genome duplication and gene family expansion from 
local-genome duplication. Unexpectedly, a significant negative correlation was 
found between the retention ratio of m6A modifications and the number of family 
members. Moreover, the divergence of m6A modifications is accompanied by 
variation in the expression level and translation efficiency of duplicated genes 
from whole- and local-genome duplication. Our work reveals new insights into 
evolutionary patterns of m6A methylomes in plant species and their implications, 
and provides a resource of plant m6A profiles for further studies of m6A 
regulation and function in an evolutionary context.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab299
PMCID: PMC8763109
PMID: 34633447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


737. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab296. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab296.

Rapid Gene Evolution in an Ancient Post-transcriptional and Translational 
Regulatory System Compensates for Meiotic X Chromosomal Inactivation.

Xia S(1), Ventura IM(1)(2), Blaha A(3), Sgromo A(3), Han S(1), Izaurralde E(3), 
Long M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(2)CAPES Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil, Brasília, DF, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, 
Tübingen, Germany.

It is conventionally assumed that conserved pathways evolve slowly with little 
participation of gene evolution. Nevertheless, it has been recently observed 
that young genes can take over fundamental functions in essential biological 
processes, for example, development and reproduction. It is unclear how newly 
duplicated genes are integrated into ancestral networks and reshape the 
conserved pathways of important functions. Here, we investigated origination and 
function of two autosomal genes that evolved recently in Drosophila: Poseidon 
and Zeus, which were created by RNA-based duplications from the X-linked CAF40, 
a subunit of the conserved CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex involved in 
posttranscriptional and translational regulation. Knockdown and knockout assays 
show that the two genes quickly evolved critically important functions in 
viability and male fertility. Moreover, our transcriptome analysis demonstrates 
that the three genes have a broad and distinct effect in the expression of 
hundreds of genes, with almost half of the differentially expressed genes being 
perturbed exclusively by one paralog, but not the others. Co-immunoprecipitation 
and tethering assays show that the CAF40 paralog Poseidon maintains the ability 
to interact with the CCR4-NOT deadenylase complex and might act in 
posttranscriptional mRNA regulation. The rapid gene evolution in the ancient 
posttranscriptional and translational regulatory system may be driven by 
evolution of sex chromosomes to compensate for the meiotic X chromosomal 
inactivation (MXCI) in Drosophila.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab296
PMCID: PMC8763131
PMID: 34626117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


738. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab294. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab294.

Detecting Selection in Multiple Populations by Modeling Ancestral Admixture 
Components.

Cheng JY(1)(2), Stern AJ(3), Racimo F(1), Nielsen R(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Lundbeck GeoGenetics Centre, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Graduate Group in Computational Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.

One of the most powerful and commonly used approaches for detecting local 
adaptation in the genome is the identification of extreme allele frequency 
differences between populations. In this article, we present a new maximum 
likelihood method for finding regions under positive selection. It is based on a 
Gaussian approximation to allele frequency changes and it incorporates admixture 
between populations. The method can analyze multiple populations simultaneously 
and retains power to detect selection signatures specific to ancestry components 
that are not representative of any extant populations. Using simulated data, we 
compare our method to related approaches, and show that it is orders of 
magnitude faster than the state-of-the-art, while retaining similar or higher 
power for most simulation scenarios. We also apply it to human genomic data and 
identify loci with extreme genetic differentiation between major geographic 
groups. Many of the genes identified are previously known selected loci relating 
to hair pigmentation and morphology, skin, and eye pigmentation. We also 
identify new candidate regions, including various selected loci in the Native 
American component of admixed Mexican-Americans. These involve diverse 
biological functions, such as immunity, fat distribution, food intake, vision, 
and hair development.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab294
PMCID: PMC8763095
PMID: 34626111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


739. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5835. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab261.

Corrigendum to: ABO Genetic Variation in Neanderthals and Denisovans.

Villanea FA, Huerta-Sanchez E, Fox K.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3373-3382.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab261
PMCID: PMC8662607
PMID: 34622284


740. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab295. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab295.

Tightly Constrained Genome Reduction and Relaxation of Purifying Selection 
during Secondary Plastid Endosymbiosis.

Uthanumallian K(1), Iha C(1), Repetti SI(1), Chan CX(2), Bhattacharya D(3), 
Duchene S(4), Verbruggen H(1).

Author information:
(1)School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Australian Centre for Ecogenomics, School of Chemistry and Molecular 
Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Rutgers University, New 
Brunswick, NJ, USA.
(4)Deptartment of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for 
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Endosymbiosis, the establishment of a former free-living prokaryotic or 
eukaryotic cell as an organelle inside a host cell, can dramatically alter the 
genomic architecture of the endosymbiont. Plastids or chloroplasts, the 
light-harvesting organelle of photosynthetic eukaryotes, are excellent models to 
study this phenomenon because plastid origin has occurred multiple times in 
evolution. Here, we investigate the genomic signature of molecular processes 
acting through secondary plastid endosymbiosis-the origination of a new plastid 
from a free-living eukaryotic alga. We used phylogenetic comparative methods to 
study gene loss and changes in selective regimes on plastid genomes, focusing on 
green algae that have given rise to three independent lineages with secondary 
plastids (euglenophytes, chlorarachniophytes, and Lepidodinium). Our results 
show an overall increase in gene loss associated with secondary endosymbiosis, 
but this loss is tightly constrained by the retention of genes essential for 
plastid function. The data show that secondary plastids have experienced 
temporary relaxation of purifying selection during secondary endosymbiosis. 
However, this process is tightly constrained, with selection relaxed only 
relative to the background in primary plastids. Purifying selection remains 
strong in absolute terms even during the endosymbiosis events. Selection 
intensity rebounds to pre-endosymbiosis levels following endosymbiosis events, 
demonstrating the changes in selection efficiency during different origin phases 
of secondary plastids. Independent endosymbiosis events in the euglenophytes, 
chlorarachniophytes, and Lepidodinium differ in their degree of relaxation of 
selection, highlighting the different evolutionary contexts of these events. 
This study reveals the selection-drift interplay during secondary endosymbiosis 
and evolutionary parallels during organellogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab295
PMCID: PMC8763093
PMID: 34613411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


741. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab291. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab291.

Dissecting Genomic Determinants of Positive Selection with an Evolution-Guided 
Regression Model.

Huang YF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
USA.
(2)Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, PA, USA.

In evolutionary genomics, it is fundamentally important to understand how 
characteristics of genomic sequences, such as gene expression level, determine 
the rate of adaptive evolution. While numerous statistical methods, such as the 
McDonald-Kreitman (MK) test, are available to examine the association between 
genomic features and the rate of adaptation, we currently lack a statistical 
approach to disentangle the independent effect of a genomic feature from the 
effects of other correlated genomic features. To address this problem, I present 
a novel statistical model, the MK regression, which augments the MK test with a 
generalized linear model. Analogous to the classical multiple regression model, 
the MK regression can analyze multiple genomic features simultaneously to infer 
the independent effect of a genomic feature, holding constant all other genomic 
features. Using the MK regression, I identify numerous genomic features driving 
positive selection in chimpanzees. These features include well-known ones, such 
as local mutation rate, residue exposure level, tissue specificity, and immune 
genes, as well as new features not previously reported, such as gene expression 
level and metabolic genes. In particular, I show that highly expressed genes may 
have a higher adaptation rate than their weakly expressed counterparts, even 
though a higher expression level may impose stronger negative selection. Also, I 
show that metabolic genes may have a higher adaptation rate than their 
nonmetabolic counterparts, possibly due to recent changes in diet in primate 
evolution. Overall, the MK regression is a powerful approach to elucidate the 
genomic basis of adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab291
PMCID: PMC8763110
PMID: 34597406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


742. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5825-5829. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab293.

eggNOG-mapper v2: Functional Annotation, Orthology Assignments, and Domain 
Prediction at the Metagenomic Scale.

Cantalapiedra CP(1), Hernández-Plaza A(1), Letunic I(2), Bork P(3)(4)(5), 
Huerta-Cepas J(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Biotecnologia y Genomica de Plantas, Universidad Politécnica de 
Madrid (UPM) - Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y 
Alimentaria (INIA), Campus de Montegancedo-UPM, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Biobyte Solutions GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology 
Unit, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany.
(5)Yonsei Frontier Lab (YFL), Yonsei University, Seoul, South Korea.

Even though automated functional annotation of genes represents a fundamental 
step in most genomic and metagenomic workflows, it remains challenging at large 
scales. Here, we describe a major upgrade to eggNOG-mapper, a tool for 
functional annotation based on precomputed orthology assignments, now optimized 
for vast (meta)genomic data sets. Improvements in version 2 include a full 
update of both the genomes and functional databases to those from eggNOG v5, as 
well as several efficiency enhancements and new features. Most notably, 
eggNOG-mapper v2 now allows for: 1) de novo gene prediction from raw contigs, 2) 
built-in pairwise orthology prediction, 3) fast protein domain discovery, and 4) 
automated GFF decoration. eggNOG-mapper v2 is available as a standalone tool or 
as an online service at http://eggnog-mapper.embl.de.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab293
PMCID: PMC8662613
PMID: 34597405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


743. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab287. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab287.

Domestication Shapes Recombination Patterns in Tomato.

Fuentes RR(1), de Ridder D(1), van Dijk ADJ(1), Peters SA(2).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Group, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Applied Bioinformatics, Wageningen Plant Research, Wageningen University and 
Research, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Meiotic recombination is a biological process of key importance in breeding, to 
generate genetic diversity and develop novel or agronomically relevant 
haplotypes. In crop tomato, recombination is curtailed as manifested by linkage 
disequilibrium decay over a longer distance and reduced diversity compared with 
wild relatives. Here, we compared domesticated and wild populations of tomato 
and found an overall conserved recombination landscape, with local changes in 
effective recombination rate in specific genomic regions. We also studied the 
dynamics of recombination hotspots resulting from domestication and found that 
loss of such hotspots is associated with selective sweeps, most notably in the 
pericentromeric heterochromatin. We detected footprints of genetic changes and 
structural variants, among them associated with transposable elements, linked 
with hotspot divergence during domestication, likely causing fine-scale 
alterations to recombination patterns and resulting in linkage drag.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab287
PMCID: PMC8763028
PMID: 34597400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


744. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab290. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab290.

Dietary, Cultural, and Pathogens-Related Selective Pressures Shaped Differential 
Adaptive Evolution among Native Mexican Populations.

Ojeda-Granados C(1)(2), Abondio P(1), Setti A(1), Sarno S(1), Gnecchi-Ruscone 
GA(1)(3), González-Orozco E(4), De Fanti S(5), Jiménez-Kaufmann A(4), 
Rangel-Villalobos H(6), Moreno-Estrada A(4), Sazzini M(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Anthropology & Centre for Genome Biology, Department 
of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences (BiGeA), University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology in Medicine, Civil Hospital of Guadalajara 
"Fray Antonio Alcalde" & Health Sciences Center, University of Guadalajara, 
Jalisco, Mexico.
(3)Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Advanced Genomics Unit, National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity 
(LANGEBIO), CINVESTAV, Irapuato, Guanajuato, Mexico.
(5)Interdepartmental Centre Alma Mater Research Institute on Global Challenges 
and Climate Change, University of Bologna, Italy.
(6)Instituto de Investigación en Genética Molecular, Centro Universitario de la 
Ciénega, Universidad de Guadalajara, Ocotlán, Jalisco, Mexico.

Comment in
    Nat Ecol Evol. 2021 Dec;5(12):1565.

Native American genetic ancestry has been remarkably implicated with increased 
risk of diverse health issues in several Mexican populations, especially in 
relation to the dramatic changes in environmental, dietary, and cultural 
settings they have recently undergone. In particular, the effects of these 
ecological transitions and Westernization of lifestyles have been investigated 
so far predominantly on Mestizo individuals. Nevertheless, indigenous groups, 
rather than admixed Mexicans, have plausibly retained the highest proportions of 
genetic components shaped by natural selection in response to the ancient milieu 
experienced by Mexican ancestors during their pre-Columbian evolutionary 
history. These formerly adaptive variants have the potential to represent the 
genetic determinants of some biological traits that are peculiar to Mexican 
people, as well as a reservoir of loci with possible biomedical relevance. To 
test such a hypothesis, we used genome-wide genotype data to infer the unique 
adaptive evolution of Native Mexican groups selected as reasonable descendants 
of the main pre-Columbian Mexican civilizations. A combination of 
haplotype-based and gene-network analyses enabled us to detect genomic 
signatures ascribable to polygenic adaptive traits plausibly evolved by the main 
genetic clusters of Mexican indigenous populations to cope with local 
environmental and/or cultural conditions. Some of these adaptations were found 
to play a role in modulating the susceptibility/resistance of these groups to 
certain pathological conditions, thus providing new evidence that diverse 
selective pressures have contributed to shape the current biological and 
disease-risk patterns of present-day Native and Mestizo Mexican populations.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab290
PMCID: PMC8763094
PMID: 34597392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


745. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab289. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab289.

Amplicon Remodeling and Genomic Mutations Drive Population Dynamics after 
Segmental Amplification.

Morgenthaler AB(1), Fritts RK(1), Copley SD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology and Cooperative 
Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado 
Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.

New enzymes often evolve by duplication and divergence of genes encoding enzymes 
with promiscuous activities that have become important in the face of 
environmental opportunities or challenges. Amplifications that increase the copy 
number of the gene under selection commonly amplify many surrounding genes. 
Extra copies of these coamplified genes must be removed, either during or after 
evolution of a new enzyme. Here we report that amplicon remodeling can begin 
even before mutations occur in the gene under selection. Amplicon remodeling and 
mutations elsewhere in the genome that indirectly increase fitness result in 
complex population dynamics, leading to emergence of clones that have improved 
fitness by different mechanisms. In this work, one of the two most successful 
clones had undergone two episodes of amplicon remodeling, leaving only four 
coamplified genes surrounding the gene under selection. Amplicon remodeling in 
the other clone resulted in removal of 111 genes from the genome, an acceptable 
solution under these selection conditions, but one that would certainly impair 
fitness under other environmental conditions.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab289
PMCID: PMC8763031
PMID: 34581806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


746. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5752-5768. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab288.

New Genes Interacted With Recent Whole-Genome Duplicates in the Fast Stem Growth 
of Bamboos.

Jin G(1), Ma PF(1), Wu X(1), Gu L(2), Long M(3), Zhang C(1), Li DZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Germplasm Bank of Wild Species, Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)Basic Forestry and Proteomics Research Center, College of Forestry, Fujian 
Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.

As drivers of evolutionary innovations, new genes allow organisms to explore new 
niches. However, clear examples of this process remain scarce. Bamboos, the 
unique grass lineage diversifying into the forest, have evolved with a key 
innovation of fast growth of woody stem, reaching up to 1 m/day. Here, we 
identify 1,622 bamboo-specific orphan genes that appeared in recent 46 million 
years, and 19 of them evolved from noncoding ancestral sequences with entire de 
novo origination process reconstructed. The new genes evolved gradually in 
exon-intron structure, protein length, expression specificity, and evolutionary 
constraint. These new genes, whether or not from de novo origination, are 
dominantly expressed in the rapidly developing shoots, and make transcriptomes 
of shoots the youngest among various bamboo tissues, rather than reproductive 
tissue in other plants. Additionally, the particularity of bamboo shoots has 
also been shaped by recent whole-genome duplicates (WGDs), which evolved 
divergent expression patterns from ancestral states. New genes and WGDs have 
been evolutionarily recruited into coexpression networks to underline 
fast-growing trait of bamboo shoot. Our study highlights the importance of 
interactions between new genes and genome duplicates in generating morphological 
innovation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab288
PMCID: PMC8662795
PMID: 34581782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


747. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5292-5308. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab286.

Somatic Mutation Analysis in Salix suchowensis Reveals Early-Segregated Cell 
Lineages.

Ren Y(1), He Z(1), Liu P(1), Traw B(1), Sun S(2), Tian D(1), Yang S(1), Jia 
Y(3), Wang L(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Ecology, School of Life Science, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, Nanjing 
Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

Long-lived plants face the challenge of ever-increasing mutational burden across 
their long lifespan. Early sequestration of meristematic stem cells is supposed 
to efficiently slow down this process, but direct measurement of somatic 
mutations that accompanies segregated cell lineages in plants is still rare. 
Here, we tracked somatic mutations in 33 leaves and 22 adventitious roots from 
22 stem-cuttings across eight major branches of a shrub willow (Salix 
suchowensis). We found that most mutations propagated separately in leaves and 
roots, providing clear evidence for early segregation of underlying cell 
lineages. By combining lineage tracking with allele frequency analysis, our 
results revealed a set of mutations shared by distinct branches, but were 
exclusively present in leaves and not in roots. These mutations were likely 
propagated by rapidly dividing somatic cell lineages which survive several 
iterations of branching, distinct from the slowly dividing axillary stem cell 
lineages. Leaf is thus contributed by both slowly and rapidly dividing cell 
lineages, leading to varied fixation chances of propagated mutations. By 
contrast, each root likely arises from a single founder cell within the 
adventitious stem cell lineages. Our findings give straightforward evidence that 
early segregation of meristems slows down mutation accumulation in axillary 
meristems, implying a plant "germline" paralog to the germline of animals 
through convergent evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab286
PMCID: PMC8662653
PMID: 34562099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


748. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5225-5240. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab285.

Simultaneous Expression of UV and Violet SWS1 Opsins Expands the Visual Palette 
in a Group of Freshwater Snakes.

Hauzman E(1)(2), Pierotti MER(3), Bhattacharyya N(4), Tashiro JH(1), Yovanovich 
CAM(3), Campos PF(5), Ventura DF(1)(2), Chang BSW(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Psychology Institute, University of 
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Hospital Israelita Albert Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Zoology, Institute of Biosciences, University of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(5)Laboratório de Toxinologia Aplicada, Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and 
Cell Signaling (CeTICS), Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.

Snakes are known to express a rod visual opsin and two cone opsins, only (SWS1, 
LWS), a reduced palette resulting from their supposedly fossorial origins. 
Dipsadid snakes in the genus Helicops are highly visual predators that 
successfully invaded freshwater habitats from ancestral terrestrial-only 
habitats. Here, we report the first case of multiple SWS1 visual pigments in a 
vertebrate, simultaneously expressed in different photoreceptors and conferring 
both UV and violet sensitivity to Helicops snakes. Molecular analysis and in 
vitro expression confirmed the presence of two functional SWS1 opsins, likely 
the result of recent gene duplication. Evolutionary analyses indicate that each 
sws1 variant has undergone different evolutionary paths with strong purifying 
selection acting on the UV-sensitive copy and dN/dS ∼1 on the violet-sensitive 
copy. Site-directed mutagenesis points to the functional role of a single amino 
acid substitution, Phe86Val, in the large spectral shift between UV and violet 
opsins. In addition, higher densities of photoreceptors and SWS1 cones in the 
ventral retina suggest improved acuity in the upper visual field possibly 
correlated with visually guided behaviors. The expanded visual opsin repertoire 
and specialized retinal architecture are likely to improve photon uptake in 
underwater and terrestrial environments, and provide the neural substrate for a 
gain in chromatic discrimination, potentially conferring unique color vision in 
the UV-violet range. Our findings highlight the innovative solutions undertaken 
by a highly specialized lineage to tackle the challenges imposed by the invasion 
of novel photic environments and the extraordinary diversity of evolutionary 
trajectories taken by visual opsin-based perception in vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab285
PMCID: PMC8662652
PMID: 34562092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


749. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5664-5677. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab281.

Visual Gene Expression Reveals a cone-to-rod Developmental Progression in 
Deep-Sea Fishes.

Lupše N(1), Cortesi F(2), Freese M(3), Marohn L(3), Pohlmann JD(3), Wysujack 
K(3), Hanel R(3), Musilova Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(2)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.
(3)Thünen Institute of Fisheries Ecology, Bremerhaven, Germany.

Vertebrates use cone cells in the retina for color vision and rod cells to see 
in dim light. Many deep-sea fishes have adapted to their environment to have 
only rod cells in the retina, while both rod and cone genes are still preserved 
in their genomes. As deep-sea fish larvae start their lives in the shallow, and 
only later submerge to the depth, they have to cope with diverse environmental 
conditions during ontogeny. Using a comparative transcriptomic approach in 20 
deep-sea fish species from eight teleost orders, we report on a developmental 
cone-to-rod switch. While adults mostly rely on rod opsin (RH1) for vision in 
dim light, larvae almost exclusively express middle-wavelength-sensitive 
("green") cone opsins (RH2) in their retinas. The phototransduction cascade 
genes follow a similar ontogenetic pattern of cone-followed by rod-specific gene 
expression in most species, except for the pearleye and sabretooth 
(Aulopiformes), in which the cone cascade remains dominant throughout 
development, casting doubts on the photoreceptor cell identity. By inspecting 
the whole genomes of five deep-sea species (four of them sequenced within this 
study: Idiacanthus fasciola, Chauliodus sloani; Stomiiformes; Coccorella 
atlantica, and Scopelarchus michaelsarsi; Aulopiformes), we found that they 
possess one or two copies of the rod RH1 opsin gene, and up to seven copies of 
the cone RH2 opsin genes in their genomes, while other cone opsin classes have 
been mostly lost. Our findings hence provide molecular evidence for a limited 
opsin gene repertoire in deep-sea fishes and a conserved vertebrate pattern 
whereby cone photoreceptors develop first and rod photoreceptors are added only 
at later developmental stages.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab281
PMCID: PMC8662630
PMID: 34562090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


750. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5437-5452. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab282.

Transcriptional Profile of the Industrial Hybrid Saccharomyces pastorianus 
Reveals Temperature-Dependent Allele Expression Bias and Preferential 
Orthologous Protein Assemblies.

Timouma S(1), Balarezo-Cisneros LN(1), Pinto J(1), De La Cerda R(2), Bond U(2), 
Schwartz JM(3), Delneri D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, Manchester Institute of 
Biotechnology, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Genetics and Microbiology, Trinity 
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, 
Faculty of Biology Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester, 
United Kingdom.

Saccharomyces pastorianus is a natural yeast evolved from different 
hybridization events between the mesophilic S. cerevisiae and the cold-tolerant 
S. eubayanus. This complex aneuploid hybrid carries multiple copies of the 
parental alleles alongside specific hybrid genes and encodes for multiple 
protein isoforms which impart novel phenotypes, such as the strong ability to 
ferment at low temperature. These characteristics lead to agonistic competition 
for substrates and a plethora of biochemical activities, resulting in a unique 
cellular metabolism. Here, we investigated the transcriptional signature of the 
different orthologous alleles in S. pastorianus during temperature shifts. We 
identified temperature-dependent media-independent genes and showed that 35% has 
their regulation dependent on extracellular leucine uptake, suggesting an 
interplay between leucine metabolism and temperature response. The analysis of 
the expression of ortholog parental alleles unveiled that the majority of the 
genes expresses preferentially one parental allele over the other and that S. 
eubayanus-like alleles are significantly over-represented among the genes 
involved in the cold acclimatization. The presence of functionally redundant 
parental alleles may impact on the nature of protein complexes established in 
the hybrid, where both parental alleles are competing. Our expression data 
indicate that the majority of the protein complexes investigated in the hybrid 
are likely to be either exclusively chimeric or unispecific and that the 
redundancy is discouraged, a scenario that fits well with the gene balance 
hypothesis. This study offers the first overview of the transcriptional pattern 
of S. pastorianus and provides a rationalization for its unique industrial 
traits at the expression level.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab282
PMCID: PMC8662600
PMID: 34550394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


751. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5610-5624. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab283.

Segregational Drift Constrains the Evolutionary Rate of Prokaryotic Plasmids.

Garoña A(1), Hülter NF(1), Romero Picazo D(1), Dagan T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of General Microbiology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany.

Plasmids are extrachromosomal genetic elements in prokaryotes that have been 
recognized as important drivers of microbial ecology and evolution. Plasmids are 
found in multiple copies inside their host cell where independent emergence of 
mutations may lead to intracellular genetic heterogeneity. The intracellular 
plasmid diversity is thus subject to changes upon cell division. However, the 
effect of plasmid segregation on plasmid evolution remains understudied. Here, 
we show that genetic drift during cell division-segregational drift-leads to the 
rapid extinction of novel plasmid alleles. We established a novel experimental 
approach to control plasmid allele frequency at the levels of a single cell and 
the whole population. Following the dynamics of plasmid alleles in an evolution 
experiment, we find that the mode of plasmid inheritance-random or clustered-is 
an important determinant of plasmid allele dynamics. Phylogenetic reconstruction 
of our model plasmid in clinical isolates furthermore reveals a slow 
evolutionary rate of plasmid-encoded genes in comparison to chromosomal genes. 
Our study provides empirical evidence that genetic drift in plasmid evolution 
occurs at multiple levels: the host cell and the population of hosts. 
Segregational drift has implications for the evolutionary rate heterogeneity of 
extrachromosomal genetic elements.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab283
PMCID: PMC8662611
PMID: 34550379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


752. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5491-5513. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab284.

Evolution of a Cytoplasmic Determinant: Evidence for the Biochemical Basis of 
Functional Evolution of the Novel Germ Line Regulator Oskar.

Blondel L(1), Besse S(1), Rivard EL(1), Ylla G(2), Extavour CG(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA, USA.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.

Germ line specification is essential in sexually reproducing organisms. Despite 
their critical role, the evolutionary history of the genes that specify animal 
germ cells is heterogeneous and dynamic. In many insects, the gene oskar is 
required for the specification of the germ line. However, the germ line role of 
oskar is thought to be a derived role resulting from co-option from an ancestral 
somatic role. To address how evolutionary changes in protein sequence could have 
led to changes in the function of Oskar protein that enabled it to regulate germ 
line specification, we searched for oskar orthologs in 1,565 publicly available 
insect genomic and transcriptomic data sets. The earliest-diverging lineage in 
which we identified an oskar ortholog was the order Zygentoma (silverfish and 
firebrats), suggesting that oskar originated before the origin of winged 
insects. We noted some order-specific trends in oskar sequence evolution, 
including whole gene duplications, clade-specific losses, and rapid divergence. 
An alignment of all known 379 Oskar sequences revealed new highly conserved 
residues as candidates that promote dimerization of the LOTUS domain. Moreover, 
we identified regions of the OSK domain with conserved predicted RNA binding 
potential. Furthermore, we show that despite a low overall amino acid 
conservation, the LOTUS domain shows higher conservation of predicted secondary 
structure than the OSK domain. Finally, we suggest new key amino acids in the 
LOTUS domain that may be involved in the previously reported Oskar-Vasa physical 
interaction that is required for its germ line role.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab284
PMCID: PMC8662646
PMID: 34550378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


753. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5275-5291. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab277.

Avian Neo-Sex Chromosomes Reveal Dynamics of Recombination Suppression and W 
Degeneration.

Sigeman H(1), Strandh M(1), Proux-Wéra E(2), Kutschera VE(2), Ponnikas S(1), 
Zhang H(1), Lundberg M(1), Soler L(3), Bunikis I(4), Tarka M(1), Hasselquist 
D(1), Nystedt B(5), Westerdahl H(1), Hansson B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, National Bioinformatics 
Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm University, Solna, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, National Bioinformatics 
Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala Genome Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, National Bioinformatics 
Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

How the avian sex chromosomes first evolved from autosomes remains elusive as 
100 million years (My) of divergence and degeneration obscure their evolutionary 
history. The Sylvioidea group of songbirds is interesting for understanding 
avian sex chromosome evolution because a chromosome fusion event ∼24 Ma formed 
"neo-sex chromosomes" consisting of an added (new) and an ancestral (old) part. 
Here, we report the complete female genome (ZW) of one Sylvioidea species, the 
great reed warbler (Acrocephalus arundinaceus). Our long-read assembly shows 
that the added region has been translocated to both Z and W, and whereas the 
added-Z has retained its gene order the added-W part has been heavily 
rearranged. Phylogenetic analyses show that recombination between the homologous 
added-Z and -W regions continued after the fusion event, and that recombination 
suppression across this region took several million years to be completed. 
Moreover, recombination suppression was initiated across multiple positions over 
the added-Z, which is not consistent with a simple linear progression starting 
from the fusion point. As expected following recombination suppression, the 
added-W show signs of degeneration including repeat accumulation and gene loss. 
Finally, we present evidence for nonrandom maintenance of slowly evolving and 
dosage-sensitive genes on both ancestral- and added-W, a process causing 
correlated evolution among orthologous genes across broad taxonomic groups, 
regardless of sex linkage.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab277
PMCID: PMC8662655
PMID: 34542640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


754. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab280. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab280.

Phenotype Bias Determines How Natural RNA Structures Occupy the Morphospace of 
All Possible Shapes.

Dingle K(1), Ghaddar F(1), Šulc P(2), Louis AA(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Applied Mathematics and Bioinformatics, Department of Mathematics 
and Natural Sciences, Gulf University for Science and Technology, Hawally, 
Kuwait.
(2)School of Molecular Sciences and Center for Molecular Design and Biomimetics 
at the Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(3)Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

Morphospaces-representations of phenotypic characteristics-are often populated 
unevenly, leaving large parts unoccupied. Such patterns are typically ascribed 
to contingency, or else to natural selection disfavoring certain parts of the 
morphospace. The extent to which developmental bias, the tendency of certain 
phenotypes to preferentially appear as potential variation, also explains these 
patterns is hotly debated. Here we demonstrate quantitatively that developmental 
bias is the primary explanation for the occupation of the morphospace of RNA 
secondary structure (SS) shapes. Upon random mutations, some RNA SS shapes (the 
frequent ones) are much more likely to appear than others. By using the 
RNAshapes method to define coarse-grained SS classes, we can directly compare 
the frequencies that noncoding RNA SS shapes appear in the RNAcentral database 
to frequencies obtained upon a random sampling of sequences. We show that: 1) 
only the most frequent structures appear in nature; the vast majority of 
possible structures in the morphospace have not yet been explored; 2) remarkably 
small numbers of random sequences are needed to produce all the RNA SS shapes 
found in nature so far; and 3) perhaps most surprisingly, the natural 
frequencies are accurately predicted, over several orders of magnitude in 
variation, by the likelihood that structures appear upon a uniform random 
sampling of sequences. The ultimate cause of these patterns is not natural 
selection, but rather a strong phenotype bias in the RNA genotype-phenotype map, 
a type of developmental bias or "findability constraint," which limits 
evolutionary dynamics to a hugely reduced subset of structures that are easy to 
"find."

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab280
PMCID: PMC8763027
PMID: 34542628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


755. Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):msab279. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab279.

Butyrate Production Pathway Abundances Are Similar in Human and Nonhuman Primate 
Gut Microbiomes.

Mallott EK(1), Amato KR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.

Over the course of human evolution, shifts in dietary practices such as 
meat-eating and cooking, have resulted in reduced fiber intake, a trend that has 
been exaggerated more recently in industrialized populations. Reduced fiber 
consumption is associated with a loss of gut microbial taxa that degrade fiber, 
particularly butyrate. Therefore, this dietary shift in humans may have altered 
the abundance of microbial genes involved in butyrate production. This study 
uses a gene-targeted alignment approach to quantify the abundance of butyrate 
production pathway genes from published wild nonhuman primate and human gut 
metagenomes. Surprisingly, humans have higher diversity and relative abundances 
of butyrate production pathways compared with all groups of nonhuman primates 
except cercopithecoids. Industrialized populations of humans also differ only 
slightly in butyrate pathway abundance from nonindustrialized populations. This 
apparent resilience of butyrate production pathways to shifts in human diet 
across both evolutionary and modern populations may signal an evolutionary shift 
in host-microbe interactions in humans that increased SCFA production. Such a 
shift could have contributed to meeting the increased energy requirements of 
humans relative to nonhuman primates.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab279
PMCID: PMC8763029
PMID: 34542625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


756. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5640-5654. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab278.

Hidden Historical Habitat-Linked Population Divergence and Contemporary Gene 
Flow of a Deep-Sea Patellogastropod Limpet.

Xu T(1)(2)(3), Wang Y(1)(2), Sun J(4), Chen C(5), Watanabe HK(5), Chen J(1)(2), 
Qian PY(1)(2), Qiu JW(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ocean Science and Hong Kong Branch of the Southern Marine 
Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), The Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Biology and Hong Kong Branch of the Southern Marine Science and 
Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong 
Kong, China.
(4)Institute of Evolution and Marine Biodiversity, Ocean University of China, 
Qingdao, China.
(5)X-STAR, Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC), 
Yokosuka, Kanagawa, Japan.

Hydrothermal vents and hydrocarbon seeps in the deep ocean are rare oases fueled 
by chemosynthesis. Biological communities inhabiting these ecosystems are often 
distributed in widely separated habitats, raising intriguing questions on how 
these organisms achieve connectivity and whether habitat types facilitate 
intraspecific divergence. The deep-sea patellogastropod limpet Bathyacmaea 
nipponica that colonizes both vents and seeps across ∼2,400 km in the Northwest 
Pacific is a feasible model to answer these questions. We analyzed 123 
individuals from four vents and three seeps using a comprehensive method 
incorporating population genomics and physical ocean modeling. Genome survey 
sequencing and genotyping-by-sequencing resulted in 9,838 single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms for population genomic analyses. Genetic divergence and 
demographic analyses revealed four habitat-linked (i.e., three seep and one 
vent) genetic groups, with the vent genetic group established via the 
opportunistic invasion of a few limpet larvae from a nearby seep genetic group. 
TreeMix analysis uncovered three historical seep-to-vent migration events. 
ADMIXTURE and divMigrate analyses elucidated weak contemporary gene flow from a 
seep genetic group to the vent genetic group. Physical ocean modeling underlined 
the potential roles of seafloor topography and ocean currents in shaping the 
genetic connectivity, contemporary migration, and local hybridization of these 
deep-sea limpets. Our study highlighted the power of integrating genomic and 
oceanographic approaches in deciphering the demography and diversification of 
deep-sea organisms. Given the increasing anthropogenic activities (e.g., mining 
and gas hydrate extraction) affecting the deep ocean, our results have 
implications for the conservation of deep-sea biodiversity and establishment of 
marine protected areas.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab278
PMCID: PMC8662656
PMID: 34534352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


757. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5685-5703. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab276.

Faster Rates of Molecular Sequence Evolution in Reproduction-Related Genes and 
in Species with Hypodermic Sperm Morphologies.

Wiberg RAW(1), Brand JN(1), Schärer L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Zoological Institute, University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Sexual selection drives the evolution of many striking behaviors and 
morphologies and should leave signatures of selection at loci underlying these 
phenotypes. However, although loci thought to be under sexual selection often 
evolve rapidly, few studies have contrasted rates of molecular sequence 
evolution at such loci across lineages with different sexual selection contexts. 
Furthermore, work has focused on separate sexed animals, neglecting alternative 
sexual systems. We investigate rates of molecular sequence evolution in 
hermaphroditic flatworms of the genus Macrostomum. Specifically, we compare 
species that exhibit contrasting sperm morphologies, strongly associated with 
multiple convergent shifts in the mating strategy, reflecting different sexual 
selection contexts. Species donating and receiving sperm in every mating have 
sperm with bristles, likely to prevent sperm removal. Meanwhile, species that 
hypodermically inject sperm lack bristles, potentially as an adaptation to the 
environment experienced by hypodermic sperm. Combining functional annotations 
from the model, Macrostomum lignano, with transcriptomes from 93 congeners, we 
find genus-wide faster sequence evolution in reproduction-related versus 
ubiquitously expressed genes, consistent with stronger sexual selection on the 
former. Additionally, species with hypodermic sperm morphologies had elevated 
molecular sequence evolution, regardless of a gene's functional annotation. 
These genome-wide patterns suggest reduced selection efficiency following shifts 
to hypodermic mating, possibly due to higher selfing rates in these species. 
Moreover, we find little evidence for convergent amino acid changes across 
species. Our work not only shows that reproduction-related genes evolve rapidly 
also in hermaphroditic animals, but also that well-replicated contrasts of 
different sexual selection contexts can reveal underappreciated genome-wide 
effects.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab276
PMCID: PMC8662610
PMID: 34534329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


758. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5210. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab257.

Corrigendum to: Evidence for Strong Mutation Bias toward, and Selection against, 
U Content in SARS-CoV-2: Implications for Vaccine Design.

Rice AM, Morales AC, Ho AT, Mordstein C, Mühlhausen S, Watson S, Cano L, Young 
B, Kudla G, Hurst LD.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):67-83.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab257
PMCID: PMC8499992
PMID: 34520550


759. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5588-5609. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab274.

Rapid Macrosatellite Evolution Promotes X-Linked Hybrid Male Sterility in a 
Feline Interspecies Cross.

Bredemeyer KR(1)(2), Seabury CM(3), Stickney MJ(4), McCarrey JR(5), vonHoldt 
BM(6), Murphy WJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(2)Interdisciplinary Program in Genetics and Genomics, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA.
(3)Veterinary Pathobiology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.
(4)Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 
USA.
(6)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.

The sterility or inviability of hybrid offspring produced from an interspecific 
mating result from incompatibilities between parental genotypes that are thought 
to result from divergence of loci involved in epistatic interactions. However, 
attributes contributing to the rapid evolution of these regions also complicates 
their assembly, thus discovery of candidate hybrid sterility loci is difficult 
and has been restricted to a small number of model systems. Here we reported 
rapid interspecific divergence at the DXZ4 macrosatellite locus in an 
interspecific cross between two closely related mammalian species: the domestic 
cat (Felis silvestris catus) and the Jungle cat (Felis chaus). DXZ4 is an 
interesting candidate due to its structural complexity, copy number variability, 
and described role in the critical yet complex biological process of 
X-chromosome inactivation. However, the full structure of DXZ4 was absent or 
incomplete in nearly every available mammalian genome assembly given its 
repetitive complexity. We compared highly continuous genomes for three cat 
species, each containing a complete DXZ4 locus, and discovered that the felid 
DXZ4 locus differs substantially from the human ortholog, and that it varies in 
copy number between cat species. Additionally, we reported expression, 
methylation, and structural conformation profiles of DXZ4 and the X chromosome 
during stages of spermatogenesis that have been previously associated with 
hybrid male sterility. Collectively, these findings suggest a new role for DXZ4 
in male meiosis and a mechanism for feline interspecific incompatibility through 
rapid satellite divergence.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab274
PMCID: PMC8662614
PMID: 34519828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


760. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5209. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab250.

Corrigendum to: Geonomics: Forward-Time, Spatially Explicit, and Arbitrarily 
Complex Landscape Genomic Simulations.

Terasaki Hart DE, Bishop AP, Wang IJ.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4634-4646.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab250
PMCID: PMC8557397
PMID: 34518891


761. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5625-5639. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab272.

Evolution of Functional Diversity in the Holozoan Tyrosine Kinome.

Yeung W(1), Kwon A(1), Taujale R(1), Bunn C(2), Venkat A(3), Kannan N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, 
Athens, GA, USA.

The emergence of multicellularity is strongly correlated with the expansion of 
tyrosine kinases, a conserved family of signaling enzymes that regulates 
pathways essential for cell-to-cell communication. Although tyrosine kinases 
have been classified from several model organisms, a molecular-level 
understanding of tyrosine kinase evolution across all holozoans is currently 
lacking. Using a hierarchical sequence constraint-based classification of 
diverse holozoan tyrosine kinases, we construct a new phylogenetic tree that 
identifies two ancient clades of cytoplasmic and receptor tyrosine kinases 
separated by the presence of an extended insert segment in the kinase domain 
connecting the D and E-helices. Present in nearly all receptor tyrosine kinases, 
this fast-evolving insertion imparts diverse functionalities, such as 
post-translational modification sites and regulatory interactions. Eph and EGFR 
receptor tyrosine kinases are two exceptions which lack this insert, each 
forming an independent lineage characterized by unique functional features. We 
also identify common constraints shared across multiple tyrosine kinase families 
which warrant the designation of three new subgroups: Src module (SrcM), insulin 
receptor kinase-like (IRKL), and fibroblast, platelet-derived, vascular, and 
growth factor receptors (FPVR). Subgroup-specific constraints reflect shared 
autoinhibitory interactions involved in kinase conformational regulation. 
Conservation analyses describe how diverse tyrosine kinase signaling functions 
arose through the addition of family-specific motifs upon subgroup-specific 
features and coevolving protein domains. We propose the oldest tyrosine kinases, 
IRKL, SrcM, and Csk, originated from unicellular premetazoans and were coopted 
for complex multicellular functions. The increased frequency of oncogenic 
variants in more recent tyrosine kinases suggests that lineage-specific 
functionalities are selectively altered in human cancers.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab272
PMCID: PMC8662651
PMID: 34515793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


762. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5539-5554. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab273.

Comparative Genomics Sheds Light on the Convergent Evolution of Miniaturized 
Wasps.

Xu H(1), Ye X(2)(3)(4), Yang Y(1), Yang Y(2), Sun YH(5), Mei Y(2), Xiong S(2), 
He K(2), Xu L(2), Fang Q(2), Li F(2), Ye G(2), Lu Z(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Treats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agroproducts, Institute of Plant Protection and Microbiology, 
Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology & Ministry of Agricultural and Rural 
Affairs Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects, 
Institute of Insect Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study, Zhejiang University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Institute of Artificial Intelligence, College of Computer Science and 
Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA.

Miniaturization has occurred in many animal lineages, including insects and 
vertebrates, as a widespread trend during animal evolution. Among Hymenoptera, 
miniaturization has taken place in some parasitoid wasp lineages independently, 
and may have contributed to the diversity of species. However, the genomic basis 
of miniaturization is little understood. Diverged approximately 200 Ma, 
Telenomus wasps (Platygastroidea) and Trichogramma wasps (Chalcidoidea) have 
both evolved to a highly reduced body size independently, representing a 
paradigmatic example of convergent evolution. Here, we report a high-quality 
chromosomal genome of Telenomus remus, a promising candidate for controlling 
Spodoptera frugiperda, a notorious pest that has recently caused severe crop 
damage. The T. remus genome (129 Mb) is characterized by a low density of 
repetitive sequence and a reduction of intron length, resulting in the shrinkage 
of genome size. We show that hundreds of genes evolved faster in two 
miniaturized parasitoids Trichogramma pretiosum and T. remus. Among them, 38 
genes exhibit extremely accelerated evolutionary rates in these miniaturized 
wasps, possessing diverse functions in eye and wing development as well as cell 
size control. These genes also highlight potential roles in body size 
regulation. In sum, our analyses uncover a set of genes with accelerated 
evolutionary rates in Tri. pretiosum and T. remus, which might be responsible 
for their convergent adaptations to miniaturization, and thus expand our 
understanding on the evolutionary basis of miniaturization. Additionally, the 
genome of T. remus represents the first genome resource of superfamily 
Platygastroidea, and will facilitate future studies of Hymenoptera evolution and 
pest control.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab273
PMCID: PMC8662594
PMID: 34515790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


763. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5678-5684. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab265.

Stepwise Evolution and Exceptional Conservation of ORF1a/b Overlap in 
Coronaviruses.

Mei H(1), Kosakovsky Pond S(2), Nekrutenko A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jun 15;:

The programmed frameshift element (PFE) rerouting translation from ORF1a to 
ORF1b is essential for the propagation of coronaviruses. The combination of 
genomic features that make up PFE-the overlap between the two reading frames, a 
slippery sequence, as well as an ensemble of complex secondary structure 
elements-places severe constraints on this region as most possible nucleotide 
substitution may disrupt one or more of these elements. The vast amount of 
SARS-CoV-2 sequencing data generated within the past year provides an 
opportunity to assess the evolutionary dynamics of PFE in great detail. Here, we 
performed a comparative analysis of all available coronaviral genomic data 
available to date. We show that the overlap between ORF1a and ORF1b evolved as a 
set of discrete 7, 16, 22, 25, and 31 nucleotide stretches with a well-defined 
phylogenetic specificity. We further examined sequencing data from over 
1,500,000 complete genomes and 55,000 raw read data sets to demonstrate 
exceptional conservation and detect signatures of selection within the PFE 
region.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab265
PMCID: PMC8499926
PMID: 34505896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


764. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5328-5344. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab268.

Multiple Sources of Introduction of North American Arabidopsis thaliana from 
across Eurasia.

Shirsekar G(1), Devos J(1), Latorre SM(1)(2), Blaha A(1), Queiroz Dias M(1), 
González Hernando A(1), Lundberg DS(1), Burbano HA(1)(2), Fenster CB(3), Weigel 
D(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Centre for Life's Origin and Evolution, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Oak Lake Field Station, Department of Natural Resource Management, South 
Dakota State University, Brookings, SD, USA.

Large-scale movement of organisms across their habitable range, or migration, is 
an important evolutionary process that can shape genetic diversity and influence 
the adaptive spread of alleles. Although human migrations have been studied in 
great detail with modern and ancient genomes, recent anthropogenic influence on 
reducing the biogeographical constraints on the migration of nonnative species 
has presented opportunities in several study systems to ask the questions about 
how repeated introductions shape genetic diversity in the introduced range. We 
present an extensive overview of population structure of North American 
Arabidopsis thaliana by studying a set of 500 whole-genome sequenced and over 
2,800 RAD-seq genotyped individuals in the context of global diversity 
represented by Afro-Eurasian genomes. We use methods based on haplotype and 
rare-allele sharing as well as phylogenetic modeling to identify likely sources 
of introductions of extant N. American A. thaliana from the native range in 
Africa and Eurasia. We find evidence of admixture among the introduced lineages 
having increased haplotype diversity and reduced mutational load. We also detect 
signals of selection in immune-system-related genes that may impart qualitative 
disease resistance to pathogens of bacterial and oomycete origin. We conclude 
that multiple introductions to a nonnative range can rapidly enhance the 
adaptive potential of a colonizing species by increasing haplotypic diversity 
through admixture. Our results lay the foundation for further investigations 
into the functional significance of admixture.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab268
PMCID: PMC8662644
PMID: 34499163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


765. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5563-5575. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab270.

Selection on Accessible Chromatin Regions in Capsella grandiflora.

Horvath R(1), Josephs EB(2), Pesquet E(3), Stinchcombe JR(4), Wright SI(4), 
Scofield D(5), Slotte T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Environment and Plant Sciences, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, Lansing, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Ecology, Environment and Plant Sciences, Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(5)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Accurate estimates of genome-wide rates and fitness effects of new mutations are 
essential for an improved understanding of molecular evolutionary processes. 
Although eukaryotic genomes generally contain a large noncoding fraction, 
functional noncoding regions and fitness effects of mutations in such regions 
are still incompletely characterized. A promising approach to characterize 
functional noncoding regions relies on identifying accessible chromatin regions 
(ACRs) tightly associated with regulatory DNA. Here, we applied this approach to 
identify and estimate selection on ACRs in Capsella grandiflora, a crucifer 
species ideal for population genomic quantification of selection due to its 
favorable population demography. We describe a population-wide ACR distribution 
based on ATAC-seq data for leaf samples of 16 individuals from a natural 
population. We use population genomic methods to estimate fitness effects and 
proportions of positively selected fixations (α) in ACRs and find that 
intergenic ACRs harbor a considerable fraction of weakly deleterious new 
mutations, as well as a significantly higher proportion of strongly deleterious 
mutations than comparable inaccessible intergenic regions. ACRs are enriched for 
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) and depleted of transposable element 
insertions, as expected if intergenic ACRs are under selection because they 
harbor regulatory regions. By integrating empirical identification of intergenic 
ACRs with analyses of eQTL and population genomic analyses of selection, we 
demonstrate that intergenic regulatory regions are an important source of nearly 
neutral mutations. These results improve our understanding of selection on 
noncoding regions and the role of nearly neutral mutations for evolutionary 
processes in outcrossing Brassicaceae species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab270
PMCID: PMC8662636
PMID: 34498072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


766. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5555-5562. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab269.

Altering the Binding Properties of PRDM9 Partially Restores Fertility across the 
Species Boundary.

Davies B(1), Gupta Hinch A(1), Cebrian-Serrano A(1), Alghadban S(1), Becker 
PW(1), Biggs D(1), Hernandez-Pliego P(1), Preece C(1), Moralli D(1), Zhang G(1), 
Myers S(1)(2), Donnelly P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Sterility or subfertility of male hybrid offspring is commonly observed. This 
phenomenon contributes to reproductive barriers between the parental 
populations, an early step in the process of speciation. One frequent cause of 
such infertility is a failure of proper chromosome pairing during male meiosis. 
In subspecies of the house mouse, the likelihood of successful chromosome 
synapsis is improved by the binding of the histone methyltransferase PRDM9 to 
both chromosome homologs at matching positions. Using genetic manipulation, we 
altered PRDM9 binding to occur more often at matched sites, and find that 
chromosome pairing defects can be rescued, not only in an intersubspecific 
cross, but also between distinct species. Using different engineered variants, 
we demonstrate a quantitative link between the degree of matched homolog 
binding, chromosome synapsis, and rescue of fertility in hybrids between Mus 
musculus and Mus spretus. The resulting partial restoration of fertility reveals 
additional mechanisms at play that act to lock-in the reproductive isolation 
between these two species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab269
PMCID: PMC8662609
PMID: 34491357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


767. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5704-5725. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab271.

Two Functional Epithelial Sodium Channel Isoforms Are Present in Rodents despite 
Pronounced Evolutionary Pseudogenization and Exon Fusion.

Gettings SM(1)(2), Maxeiner S(3), Tzika M(1), Cobain MRD(1), Ruf I(4), Benseler 
F(5), Brose N(5), Krasteva-Christ G(3), Vande Velde G(2), Schönberger M(2), 
Althaus M(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Natural and Environmental Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(2)Biomedical Imaging, Department of Imaging and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Saarland University School of 
Medicine, Homburg, Germany.
(4)Division of Messel Research and Mammalogy, Senckenberg Research Institute and 
Natural History Museum Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(5)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute of Experimental 
Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Institute for Functional Gene Analytics, Department of Natural Sciences, 
Bonn-Rhein-Sieg University of Applied Sciences, Rheinbach, Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Feb 3;39(2):

The epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) plays a key role in salt and water 
homeostasis in tetrapod vertebrates. There are four ENaC subunits (α, β, γ, δ), 
forming heterotrimeric αβγ- or δβγ-ENaCs. Although the physiology of αβγ-ENaC is 
well understood, for decades the field has stalled with respect to δβγ-ENaC due 
to the lack of mammalian model organisms. The SCNN1D gene coding for δ-ENaC was 
previously believed to be absent in rodents, hindering studies using standard 
laboratory animals. We analyzed all currently available rodent genomes and 
discovered that SCNN1D is present in rodents but was independently lost in five 
rodent lineages, including the Muridae (mice and rats). The independent loss of 
SCNN1D in rodent lineages may be constrained by phylogeny and taxon-specific 
adaptation to dry habitats, however habitat aridity does not provide a selection 
pressure for maintenance of SCNN1D across Rodentia. A fusion of two exons coding 
for a structurally flexible region in the extracellular domain of δ-ENaC 
appeared in the Hystricognathi (a group that includes guinea pigs). This 
conserved pattern evolved at least 41 Ma and represents a new autapomorphic 
feature for this clade. Exon fusion does not impair functionality of guinea pig 
(Cavia porcellus) δβγ-ENaC expressed in Xenopus oocytes. Electrophysiological 
characterization at the whole-cell and single-channel level revealed conserved 
biophysical features and mechanisms controlling guinea pig αβγ- and δβγ-ENaC 
function as compared with human orthologs. Guinea pigs therefore represent 
commercially available mammalian model animals that will help shed light on the 
physiological function of δ-ENaC.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab271
PMCID: PMC8662647
PMID: 34491346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


768. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5309-5327. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab267.

Evolution of Methyltransferase-Like (METTL) Proteins in Metazoa: A Complex Gene 
Family Involved in Epitranscriptomic Regulation and Other Epigenetic Processes.

Wong JM(1), Eirin-Lopez JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Institute of Environment, Florida 
International University, Miami, FL, USA.

The methyltransferase-like (METTL) proteins constitute a family of 
seven-beta-strand methyltransferases with S-adenosyl methionine-binding domains 
that modify DNA, RNA, and proteins. Methylation by METTL proteins contributes to 
the epigenetic, and in the case of RNA modifications, epitranscriptomic 
regulation of a variety of biological processes. Despite their functional 
importance, most investigations of the substrates and functions of METTLs within 
metazoans have been restricted to model vertebrate taxa. In the present work, we 
explore the evolutionary mechanisms driving the diversification and functional 
differentiation of 33 individual METTL proteins across Metazoa. Our results show 
that METTLs are nearly ubiquitous across the animal kingdom, with most having 
arisen early in metazoan evolution (i.e., occur in basal metazoan phyla). 
Individual METTL lineages each originated from single independent ancestors, 
constituting monophyletic clades, which suggests that each METTL was subject to 
strong selective constraints driving its structural and/or functional 
specialization. Interestingly, a similar process did not extend to the 
differentiation of nucleoside-modifying and protein-modifying METTLs (i.e., each 
METTL type did not form a unique monophyletic clade). The members of these two 
types of METTLs also exhibited differences in their rates of evolution. Overall, 
we provide evidence that the long-term evolution of METTL family members was 
driven by strong purifying selection, which in combination with adaptive 
selection episodes, led to the functional specialization of individual METTL 
lineages. This work contributes useful information regarding the evolution of a 
gene family that fulfills a variety of epigenetic functions, and can have 
profound influences on molecular processes and phenotypic traits.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab267
PMCID: PMC8662637
PMID: 34480573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


769. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5423-5436. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab252.

Recombination Marks the Evolutionary Dynamics of a Recently Endogenized 
Retrovirus.

Yang L(1)(2), Malhotra R(3), Chikhi R(2)(3)(4), Elleder D(1)(5), Kaiser T(1), 
Rong J(3), Medvedev P(2)(3)(4), Poss M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, USA.
(2)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA, USA.
(5)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Prague, Czech Republic.

All vertebrate genomes have been colonized by retroviruses along their 
evolutionary trajectory. Although endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) can contribute 
important physiological functions to contemporary hosts, such benefits are 
attributed to long-term coevolution of ERV and host because germline infections 
are rare and expansion is slow, and because the host effectively silences them. 
The genomes of several outbred species including mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus) 
are currently being colonized by ERVs, which provides an opportunity to study 
ERV dynamics at a time when few are fixed. We previously established the 
locus-specific distribution of cervid ERV (CrERV) in populations of mule deer. 
In this study, we determine the molecular evolutionary processes acting on CrERV 
at each locus in the context of phylogenetic origin, genome location, and 
population prevalence. A mule deer genome was de novo assembled from short- and 
long-insert mate pair reads and CrERV sequence generated at each locus. We 
report that CrERV composition and diversity have recently measurably increased 
by horizontal acquisition of a new retrovirus lineage. This new lineage has 
further expanded CrERV burden and CrERV genomic diversity by activating and 
recombining with existing CrERV. Resulting interlineage recombinants then 
endogenize and subsequently expand. CrERV loci are significantly closer to genes 
than expected if integration were random and gene proximity might explain the 
recent expansion of one recombinant CrERV lineage. Thus, in mule deer, 
retroviral colonization is a dynamic period in the molecular evolution of CrERV 
that also provides a burst of genomic diversity to the host population.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab252
PMCID: PMC8662619
PMID: 34480565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


770. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5782-5805. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab259.

Drosophila Evolution over Space and Time (DEST): A New Population Genomics 
Resource.

Kapun M(1)(2), Nunez JCB(3), Bogaerts-Márquez M(4), Murga-Moreno J(5)(6), Paris 
M(7), Outten J(3), Coronado-Zamora M(4), Tern C(3), Rota-Stabelli O(8), 
Guerreiro MPG(5), Casillas S(5)(6), Orengo DJ(9)(10), Puerma E(9)(10), Kankare 
M(11), Ometto L(12), Loeschcke V(13), Onder BS(14), Abbott JK(15), Schaeffer 
SW(16), Rajpurohit S(17)(18), Behrman EL(17)(19), Schou MF(13)(15), Merritt 
TJS(20), Lazzaro BP(21), Glaser-Schmitt A(22), Argyridou E(22), Staubach F(23), 
Wang Y(23), Tauber E(24), Serga SV(25)(26), Fabian DK(27), Dyer KA(28), Wheat 
CW(29), Parsch J(22), Grath S(22), Veselinovic MS(30), Stamenkovic-Radak M(30), 
Jelic M(30), Buendía-Ruíz AJ(31), Gómez-Julián MJ(31), Espinosa-Jimenez ML(31), 
Gallardo-Jiménez FD(32), Patenkovic A(33), Eric K(33), Tanaskovic M(33), 
Ullastres A(4), Guio L(4), Merenciano M(4), Guirao-Rico S(4), Horváth V(4), 
Obbard DJ(34), Pasyukova E(35), Alatortsev VE(35), Vieira CP(36)(37), Vieira 
J(36)(37), Torres JR(38), Kozeretska I(25)(26), Maistrenko OM(25)(39), 
Montchamp-Moreau C(40), Mukha DV(41), Machado HE(42)(43), Lamb K(3), Paulo 
T(44), Yusuf L(45), Barbadilla A(5)(6), Petrov D(42), Schmidt P(16), Gonzalez 
J(4), Flatt T(7), Bergland AO(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Cell & Developmental Biology, Center of Anatomy and Cell 
Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(4)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Institute of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(8)Center Agriculture Food Environment, University of Trento, San Michele all' 
Adige, Italy.
(9)Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística, Facultat de Biologia, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Institut de Recerca de la Biodiversitat (IRBio), Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyväskylä, 
Jyväskylä, Finland.
(12)Department of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(13)Department of Biology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(14)Department of Biology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(15)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(16)Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA, USA.
(17)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(18)Division of Biological and Life Sciences, School of Arts and Sciences, 
Ahmedabad University, Ahmedabad, India.
(19)Janelia Research Campus, Ashburn, VA, USA.
(20)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Laurentian University, Sudbury, ON, 
Canada.
(21)Department of Entomology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(22)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
(23)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany.
(24)Department of Evolutionary and Environmental Biology, Institute of 
Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(25)Department of General and Medical Genetics, Taras Shevchenko National 
University of Kyiv, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(26)State Institution National Antarctic Scientific Center, Ministry of 
Education and Science of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(27)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(28)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(29)Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(30)Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(31)IES Eladio Cabañero, Tomelloso, Spain.
(32)IES Jose de Mora, Baza, Spain.
(33)Institute for Biological Research "Siniša Stanković", National Institute of 
Republic of Serbia, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(34)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
United Kingdom.
(35)Institute of Molecular Genetics of the National Research Centre "Kurchatov 
Institute", Moscow, Russia.
(36)Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), Porto, Portugal.
(37)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(38)La ciència al teu món, Barcelona, Spain.
(39)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
(40)UMR Évolution, Génomes, Comportement et Écologie, Université Paris-Saclay, 
CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(41)Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russia.
(42)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(43)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(44)Departamento de Biologia Animal, Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, 
Portugal.
(45)Center for Biological Diversity, University of St. Andrews, St Andrews, 
United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):

Drosophila melanogaster is a leading model in population genetics and genomics, 
and a growing number of whole-genome data sets from natural populations of this 
species have been published over the last years. A major challenge is the 
integration of disparate data sets, often generated using different sequencing 
technologies and bioinformatic pipelines, which hampers our ability to address 
questions about the evolution of this species. Here we address these issues by 
developing a bioinformatics pipeline that maps pooled sequencing (Pool-Seq) 
reads from D. melanogaster to a hologenome consisting of fly and symbiont 
genomes and estimates allele frequencies using either a heuristic (PoolSNP) or a 
probabilistic variant caller (SNAPE-pooled). We use this pipeline to generate 
the largest data repository of genomic data available for D. melanogaster to 
date, encompassing 271 previously published and unpublished population samples 
from over 100 locations in >20 countries on four continents. Several of these 
locations have been sampled at different seasons across multiple years. This 
data set, which we call Drosophila Evolution over Space and Time (DEST), is 
coupled with sampling and environmental metadata. A web-based genome browser and 
web portal provide easy access to the SNP data set. We further provide 
guidelines on how to use Pool-Seq data for model-based demographic inference. 
Our aim is to provide this scalable platform as a community resource which can 
be easily extended via future efforts for an even more extensive cosmopolitan 
data set. Our resource will enable population geneticists to analyze 
spatiotemporal genetic patterns and evolutionary dynamics of D. melanogaster 
populations in unprecedented detail.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab259
PMCID: PMC8662648
PMID: 34469576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


771. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5819-5824. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab264.

A Daily-Updated Database and Tools for Comprehensive SARS-CoV-2 
Mutation-Annotated Trees.

McBroome J(1)(2), Thornlow B(1)(2), Hinrichs AS(2), Kramer A(1)(2), De Maio 
N(3), Goldman N(3), Haussler D(1)(2), Corbett-Detig R(1)(2), Turakhia Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, CA, USA.
(2)Genomics Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA.
(3)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute 
(EMBL-EBI), Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jul 13;:

The vast scale of SARS-CoV-2 sequencing data has made it increasingly 
challenging to comprehensively analyze all available data using existing tools 
and file formats. To address this, we present a database of SARS-CoV-2 
phylogenetic trees inferred with unrestricted public sequences, which we update 
daily to incorporate new sequences. Our database uses the recently proposed 
mutation-annotated tree (MAT) format to efficiently encode the tree with 
branches labeled with parsimony-inferred mutations, as well as Nextstrain clade 
and Pango lineage labels at clade roots. As of June 9, 2021, our SARS-CoV-2 MAT 
consists of 834,521 sequences and provides a comprehensive view of the virus' 
evolutionary history using public data. We also present matUtils-a command-line 
utility for rapidly querying, interpreting, and manipulating the MATs. Our 
daily-updated SARS-CoV-2 MAT database and matUtils software are available at 
http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/wuhCor1/UShER_SARS-CoV-2/ and 
https://github.com/yatisht/usher, respectively.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab264
PMCID: PMC8662617
PMID: 34469548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


772. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5472-5479. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab263.

A New World Monkey Resembles Human in Bitter Taste Receptor Evolution and 
Function via a Single Parallel Amino Acid Substitution.

Yang H(1), Yang S(1)(2), Fan F(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Dai S(1), Zhou X(1), Steiner 
CC(3), Coppedge B(3), Roos C(4), Cai X(5), Irwin DM(6), Shi P(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance, Beckman Center for Conservation Research, 
Escondido, CA, USA.
(4)Gene Bank of Primates and Primate Genetics Laboratory, German Primate Center, 
Leibniz Institute for Primate Research, Göttingen, Germany.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, 
Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(7)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Bitter taste receptors serve as a vital component in the defense system against 
toxin intake by animals, and the family of genes encoding these receptors has 
been demonstrated, usually by family size variance, to correlate with dietary 
preference. However, few systematic studies of specific Tas2R to unveil their 
functional evolution have been conducted. Here, we surveyed Tas2R16 across all 
major clades of primates and reported a rare case of a convergent change to 
increase sensitivity to β-glucopyranosides in human and a New World monkey, the 
white-faced saki. Combining analyses at multiple levels, we demonstrate that a 
parallel amino acid substitution (K172N) shared by these two species is 
responsible for this functional convergence of Tas2R16. Considering the 
specialized feeding preference of the white-faced saki, the K172N change likely 
played an important adaptive role in its early evolution to avoid potentially 
toxic cyanogenic glycosides, as suggested for the human TAS2R16 gene.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab263
PMCID: PMC8662605
PMID: 34469542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


773. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5769-5781. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab266.

A Probabilistic Model for Indel Evolution: Differentiating Insertions from 
Deletions.

Loewenthal G(1), Rapoport D(1), Avram O(1), Moshe A(1), Wygoda E(1), Itzkovitch 
A(1), Israeli O(1), Azouri D(1)(2), Cartwright RA(3)(4), Mayrose I(2), Pupko 
T(1).

Author information:
(1)The Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research, George S. Wise Faculty 
of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)School of Plant Sciences and Food Security, George S. Wise Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.

Insertions and deletions (indels) are common molecular evolutionary events. 
However, probabilistic models for indel evolution are under-developed due to 
their computational complexity. Here, we introduce several improvements to indel 
modeling: 1) While previous models for indel evolution assumed that the rates 
and length distributions of insertions and deletions are equal, here we propose 
a richer model that explicitly distinguishes between the two; 2) we introduce 
numerous summary statistics that allow approximate Bayesian computation-based 
parameter estimation; 3) we develop a method to correct for biases introduced by 
alignment programs, when inferring indel parameters from empirical data sets; 
and 4) using a model-selection scheme, we test whether the richer model better 
fits biological data compared with the simpler model. Our analyses suggest that 
both our inference scheme and the model-selection procedure achieve high 
accuracy on simulated data. We further demonstrate that our proposed richer 
model better fits a large number of empirical data sets and that, for the 
majority of these data sets, the deletion rate is higher than the insertion 
rate.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab266
PMCID: PMC8662616
PMID: 34469521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


774. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5576-5587. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab244.

Alpha Satellite Insertion Close to an Ancestral Centromeric Region.

Giannuzzi G(1)(2)(3), Logsdon GA(4), Chatron N(2)(5)(6), Miller DE(4)(7), 
Reversat J(5), Munson KM(4), Hoekzema K(4), Bonnet-Dupeyron MN(8), 
Rollat-Farnier PA(5)(9), Baker CA(4), Sanlaville D(5)(6), Eichler EE(4)(10), 
Schluth-Bolard C(5)(6), Reymond A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(2)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA.
(5)Service de Génétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(6)Institut NeuroMyoGène, University of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetic Medicine, University of 
Washington and Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA.
(8)Service de Cytogénétique, Centre Hospitalier de Valence, Valence, France.
(9)Cellule Bioinformatique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(10)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

Human centromeres are mainly composed of alpha satellite DNA hierarchically 
organized as higher-order repeats (HORs). Alpha satellite dynamics is shown by 
sequence homogenization in centromeric arrays and by its transfer to other 
centromeric locations, for example, during the maturation of new centromeres. We 
identified during prenatal aneuploidy diagnosis by fluorescent in situ 
hybridization a de novo insertion of alpha satellite DNA from the centromere of 
chromosome 18 (D18Z1) into cytoband 15q26. Although bound by CENP-B, this locus 
did not acquire centromeric functionality as demonstrated by the lack of 
constriction and the absence of CENP-A binding. The insertion was associated 
with a 2.8-kbp deletion and likely occurred in the paternal germline. The site 
was enriched in long terminal repeats and located ∼10 Mbp from the location 
where a centromere was ancestrally seeded and became inactive in the common 
ancestor of humans and apes 20-25 million years ago. Long-read mapping to the 
T2T-CHM13 human genome assembly revealed that the insertion derives from a 
specific region of chromosome 18 centromeric 12-mer HOR array in which the 
monomer size follows a regular pattern. The rearrangement did not directly 
disrupt any gene or predicted regulatory element and did not alter the 
methylation status of the surrounding region, consistent with the absence of 
phenotypic consequences in the carrier. This case demonstrates a likely rare but 
new class of structural variation that we name "alpha satellite insertion." It 
also expands our knowledge on alphoid DNA dynamics and conveys the possibility 
that alphoid arrays can relocate near vestigial centromeric sites.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab244
PMCID: PMC8662618
PMID: 34464971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


775. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5655-5663. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab243.

A Positively Selected MAGEE2 LoF Allele Is Associated with Sexual Dimorphism in 
Human Brain Size and Shows Similar Phenotypes in Magee2 Null Mice.

Szpak M(1), Collins SC(2)(3), Li Y(4), Liu X(5), Ayub Q(1)(6), Fischer MC(3), 
Vancollie VE(1), Lelliott CJ(1), Xue Y(1), Yalcin B(2)(3), Yang H(4), 
Tyler-Smith C(1).

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(2)Inserm UMR1231, Genetics of Developmental Disorders Laboratory, University of 
Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France.
(3)IGBMC, UMR7104, Illkirch, Inserm, France.
(4)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, 
Shenzhen, China.
(6)Monash University Malaysia Genomics Facility, School of Science, Bandar 
Sunway, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.

A nonsense allele at rs1343879 in human MAGEE2 on chromosome X has previously 
been reported as a strong candidate for positive selection in East Asia. This 
premature stop codon causing ∼80% protein truncation is characterized by a 
striking geographical pattern of high population differentiation: common in Asia 
and the Americas (up to 84% in the 1000 Genomes Project East Asians) but rare 
elsewhere. Here, we generated a Magee2 mouse knockout mimicking the human 
loss-of-function mutation to study its functional consequences. The Magee2 null 
mice did not exhibit gross abnormalities apart from enlarged brain structures 
(13% increased total brain area, P = 0.0022) in hemizygous males. The area of 
the granular retrosplenial cortex responsible for memory, navigation, and 
spatial information processing was the most severely affected, exhibiting an 
enlargement of 34% (P = 3.4×10-6). The brain size in homozygous females showed 
the opposite trend of reduced brain size, although this did not reach 
statistical significance. With these insights, we performed human association 
analyses between brain size measurements and rs1343879 genotypes in 141 Chinese 
volunteers with brain MRI scans, replicating the sexual dimorphism seen in the 
knockout mouse model. The derived stop gain allele was significantly associated 
with a larger volume of gray matter in males (P = 0.00094), and smaller volumes 
of gray (P = 0.00021) and white (P = 0.0015) matter in females. It is unclear 
whether or not the observed neuroanatomical phenotypes affect behavior or 
cognition, but it might have been the driving force underlying the positive 
selection in humans.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab243
PMCID: PMC8662591
PMID: 34464968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


776. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5726-5734. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab262.

Convergent Phenotypic Evolution of Rhodopsin for Dim-Light Sensing across 
Deep-Diving Vertebrates.

Xia Y(1)(2), Cui Y(2), Wang A(3), Liu F(2), Chi H(1), Potter JHT(4), Williamson 
J(4), Chen X(3), Rossiter SJ(4), Liu Y(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural 
University, Shenyang, China.
(3)Shanghai Zoo, Shanghai, China.
(4)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary, University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(5)Key Laboratory of Zoonosis of Liaoning Province, Shenyang Agricultural 
University, Shenyang, China.

Rhodopsin comprises an opsin attached to a retinal chromophore and is the only 
visual pigment conferring dim-light vision in vertebrates. On activation by 
photons, the retinal group becomes detached from the opsin, which is then 
inactive until it is recharged. Of all vertebrate species, those that dive face 
unique visual challenges, experiencing rapid decreases in light level and 
hunting in near darkness. Here, we combine sequence analyses with functional 
assays to show that the rhodopsin pigments of four divergent lineages of 
deep-diving vertebrates have undergone convergent increases in their retinal 
release rate. We compare gene sequences and detect parallel amino acids between 
penguins and diving mammals and perform mutagenesis to show that a single 
critical residue fully explains the observed increases in retinal release rate 
in both the emperor penguin and beaked whale. At the same time, we find that 
other shared sites have no significant effect on retinal release, implying that 
convergence does not always signify adaptive significance. We propose that 
accelerated retinal release confers rapid rhodopsin recharging, enabling the 
visual systems of diving species to adjust quickly to changing light levels as 
they descend through the water column. This contrasts with nocturnal species, 
where adaptation to darkness has been attributed to slower retinal release 
rates.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab262
PMCID: PMC8662592
PMID: 34463769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


777. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5376-5390. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab260.

Two Genomic Loci Control Three Eye Colors in the Domestic Pigeon (Columba 
livia).

Maclary ET(1), Phillips B(1), Wauer R(1), Boer EF(1), Bruders R(1), Gilvarry 
T(1), Holt C(2), Yandell M(2), Shapiro MD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Human Genetics and Utah Center for Genetic Discovery, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

The iris of the eye shows striking color variation across vertebrate species, 
and may play important roles in crypsis and communication. The domestic pigeon 
(Columba livia) has three common iris colors, orange, pearl (white), and bull 
(dark brown), segregating in a single species, thereby providing a unique 
opportunity to identify the genetic basis of iris coloration. We used 
comparative genomics and genetic mapping in laboratory crosses to identify two 
candidate genes that control variation in iris color in domestic pigeons. We 
identified a nonsense mutation in the solute carrier SLC2A11B that is shared 
among all pigeons with pearl eye color, and a locus associated with bull eye 
color that includes EDNRB2, a gene involved in neural crest migration and 
pigment development. However, bull eye is likely controlled by a heterogeneous 
collection of alleles across pigeon breeds. We also found that the EDNRB2 region 
is associated with regionalized plumage depigmentation (piebalding). Our study 
identifies two candidate genes for eye colors variation, and establishes a 
genetic link between iris and plumage color, two traits that vary widely in the 
evolution of birds and other vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab260
PMCID: PMC8662629
PMID: 34459920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


778. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5806-5818. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab258.

TIAMMAt: Leveraging Biodiversity to Revise Protein Domain Models, Evidence from 
Innate Immunity.

Tassia MG(1), David KT(1), Townsend JP(2)(3), Halanych KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA.
(2)Whitman Center, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Providence College, Providence, RI, USA.

Sequence annotation is fundamental for studying the evolution of protein 
families, particularly when working with nonmodel species. Given the rapid, 
ever-increasing number of species receiving high-quality genome sequencing, 
accurate domain modeling that is representative of species diversity is crucial 
for understanding protein family sequence evolution and their inferred 
function(s). Here, we describe a bioinformatic tool called Taxon-Informed 
Adjustment of Markov Model Attributes (TIAMMAt) which revises domain profile 
hidden Markov models (HMMs) by incorporating homologous domain sequences from 
underrepresented and nonmodel species. Using innate immunity pathways as a case 
study, we show that revising profile HMM parameters to directly account for 
variation in homologs among underrepresented species provides valuable insight 
into the evolution of protein families. Following adjustment by TIAMMAt, domain 
profile HMMs exhibit changes in their per-site amino acid state emission 
probabilities and insertion/deletion probabilities while maintaining the overall 
structure of the consensus sequence. Our results show that domain revision can 
heavily impact evolutionary interpretations for some families (i.e., NLR's NACHT 
domain), whereas impact on other domains (e.g., rel homology domain and 
interferon regulatory factor domains) is minimal due to high levels of sequence 
conservation across the sampled phylogenetic depth (i.e., Metazoa). Importantly, 
TIAMMAt revises target domain models to reflect homologous sequence variation 
using the taxonomic distribution under consideration by the user. TIAMMAt's 
flexibility to revise any subset of the Pfam database using a user-defined 
taxonomic pool will make it a valuable tool for future protein evolution 
studies, particularly when incorporating (or focusing) on nonmodel species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab258
PMCID: PMC8662601
PMID: 34459919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


779. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5514-5527. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab254.

Phylogenetic Signal, Congruence, and Uncertainty across Bacteria and Archaea.

Martinez-Gutierrez CA(1), Aylward FO(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(2)Center for Emerging, Zoonotic, and Arthropod-borne Pathogens, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

Reconstruction of the Tree of Life is a central goal in biology. Although 
numerous novel phyla of bacteria and archaea have recently been discovered, 
inconsistent phylogenetic relationships are routinely reported, and many 
inter-phylum and inter-domain evolutionary relationships remain unclear. Here, 
we benchmark different marker genes often used in constructing multidomain 
phylogenetic trees of bacteria and archaea and present a set of marker genes 
that perform best for multidomain trees constructed from concatenated 
alignments. We use recently-developed Tree Certainty metrics to assess the 
confidence of our results and to obviate the complications of traditional 
bootstrap-based metrics. Given the vastly disparate number of genomes available 
for different phyla of bacteria and archaea, we also assessed the impact of 
taxon sampling on multidomain tree construction. Our results demonstrate that 
biases between the representation of different taxonomic groups can dramatically 
impact the topology of resulting trees. Inspection of our highest-quality tree 
supports the division of most bacteria into Terrabacteria and Gracilicutes, with 
Thermatogota and Synergistota branching earlier from these superphyla. This tree 
also supports the inclusion of the Patescibacteria within the Terrabacteria as a 
sister group to the Chloroflexota instead of as a basal-branching lineage. For 
the Archaea, our tree supports three monophyletic lineages (DPANN, 
Euryarchaeota, and TACK/Asgard), although we note the basal placement of the 
DPANN may still represent an artifact caused by biased sequence composition. Our 
findings provide a robust and standardized framework for multidomain 
phylogenetic reconstruction that can be used to evaluate inter-phylum 
relationships and assess uncertainty in conflicting topologies of the Tree of 
Life.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab254
PMCID: PMC8662615
PMID: 34436605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


780. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5241-5254. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab253.

Fates of Sec, Tat, and YidC Translocases in Mitochondria and Other Eukaryotic 
Compartments.

Petrů M(1), Dohnálek V(1), Füssy Z(1), Doležal P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, 
Vestec, Czech Republic.

Formation of mitochondria by the conversion of a bacterial endosymbiont was a 
key moment in the evolution of eukaryotes. It was made possible by outsourcing 
the endosymbiont's genetic control to the host nucleus, while developing the 
import machinery for proteins synthesized on cytosolic ribosomes. The original 
protein export machines of the nascent organelle remained to be repurposed or 
were completely abandoned. This review follows the evolutionary fates of three 
prokaryotic inner membrane translocases Sec, Tat, and YidC. Homologs of all 
three translocases can still be found in current mitochondria, but with 
different importance for mitochondrial function. Although the mitochondrial YidC 
homolog, Oxa1, became an omnipresent independent insertase, the other two 
remained only sporadically present in mitochondria. Only a single substrate is 
known for the mitochondrial Tat and no function has yet been assigned for the 
mitochondrial Sec. Finally, this review compares these ancestral mitochondrial 
proteins with their paralogs operating in the plastids and the endomembrane 
system.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab253
PMCID: PMC8662606
PMID: 34436602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


781. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5735-5751. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab255.

Rapid Shifts in Mitochondrial tRNA Import in a Plant Lineage with Extensive 
Mitochondrial tRNA Gene Loss.

Warren JM(1), Salinas-Giegé T(2), Triant DA(3), Taylor DR(4), Drouard L(2), 
Sloan DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(2)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire des Plantes-CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France.
(3)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

In most eukaryotes, transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are one of the very few classes of 
genes remaining in the mitochondrial genome, but some mitochondria have lost 
these vestiges of their prokaryotic ancestry. Sequencing of mitogenomes from the 
flowering plant genus Silene previously revealed a large range in tRNA gene 
content, suggesting rapid and ongoing gene loss/replacement. Here, we use this 
system to test longstanding hypotheses about how mitochondrial tRNA genes are 
replaced by importing nuclear-encoded tRNAs. We traced the evolutionary history 
of these gene loss events by sequencing mitochondrial genomes from key outgroups 
(Agrostemma githago and Silene [=Lychnis] chalcedonica). We then performed the 
first global sequencing of purified plant mitochondrial tRNA populations to 
characterize the expression of mitochondrial-encoded tRNAs and the identity of 
imported nuclear-encoded tRNAs. We also confirmed the utility of high-throughput 
sequencing methods for the detection of tRNA import by sequencing mitochondrial 
tRNA populations in a species (Solanum tuberosum) with known tRNA trafficking 
patterns. Mitochondrial tRNA sequencing in Silene revealed substantial shifts in 
the abundance of some nuclear-encoded tRNAs in conjunction with their recent 
history of mt-tRNA gene loss and surprising cases where tRNAs with anticodons 
still encoded in the mitochondrial genome also appeared to be imported. These 
data suggest that nuclear-encoded counterparts are likely replacing 
mitochondrial tRNAs even in systems with recent mitochondrial tRNA gene loss, 
and the redundant import of a nuclear-encoded tRNA may provide a mechanism for 
functional replacement between translation systems separated by billions of 
years of evolutionary divergence.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab255
PMCID: PMC8662596
PMID: 34436590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


782. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5405-5422. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab256.

Evolutionary Profile for (Host and Viral) MLKL Indicates Its Activities as a 
Battlefront for Extensive Counteradaptation.

Palmer SN(1), Chappidi S(1), Pinkham C(1), Hancks DC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.

Pathogen infection triggers host innate defenses which may result in the 
activation of regulated cell death (RCD) pathways such as apoptosis. Given a 
vital role in immunity, apoptotic effectors are often counteracted by 
pathogen-encoded antagonists. Mounting evidence indicates that programmed 
necrosis, which is mediated by the RIPK3/MLKL axis and termed necroptosis, 
evolved as a countermeasure to pathogen-mediated inhibition of apoptosis. Yet, 
it is unclear whether components of this emerging RCD pathway display signatures 
associated with pathogen conflict that are rare in combination but common to key 
host defense factors, namely, rapid evolution, viral homolog (virolog), and 
cytokine induction. We leveraged evolutionary sequence analysis that examines 
rates of amino acid replacement, which revealed: 1) strong and recurrent 
signatures of positive selection for primate and bat RIPK3 and MLKL, and 2) 
elevated rates of amino acid substitution on multiple RIPK3/MLKL surfaces 
suggestive of past antagonism with multiple, distinct pathogen-encoded 
inhibitors. Furthermore, our phylogenomics analysis across poxvirus genomes 
illuminated volatile patterns of evolution for a recently described MLKL viral 
homolog. Specifically, poxviral MLKLs have undergone numerous gene replacements 
mediated by duplication and deletion events. In addition, MLKL protein 
expression is stimulated by interferons in human and mouse cells. Thus, MLKL 
displays all three hallmarks of pivotal immune factors of which only a handful 
of factors like OAS1 exhibit. These data support the hypothesis that over 
evolutionary time MLKL functions-which may include execution of necroptosis-have 
served as a major determinant of infection outcomes despite gene loss in some 
host genomes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab256
PMCID: PMC8662602
PMID: 34436583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


783. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5391-5404. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab251.

Phylogenomic Analysis of Velvet Worms (Onychophora) Uncovers an Evolutionary 
Radiation in the Neotropics.

Baker CM(1), Buckman-Young RS(1), Costa CS(2), Giribet G(1).

Author information:
(1)Museum of Comparative Zoology, Department of Organismic and Evolutionary 
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Laboratório de Sistemática e Taxonomia de Artrópodes Terrestres, Departamento 
de Biologia e Zoologia, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal de Mato 
Grosso, Cuiabá, Brazil.

Onychophora ("velvet worms") are charismatic soil invertebrates known for their 
status as a "living fossil," their phylogenetic affiliation to arthropods, and 
their distinctive biogeographic patterns. However, several aspects of their 
internal phylogenetic relationships remain unresolved, limiting our 
understanding of the group's evolutionary history, particularly with regard to 
changes in reproductive mode and dispersal ability. To address these gaps, we 
used RNA sequencing and phylogenomic analysis of transcriptomes to reconstruct 
the evolutionary relationships and infer divergence times within the phylum. We 
recovered a fully resolved and well-supported phylogeny for the circum-Antarctic 
family Peripatopsidae, which retains signals of Gondwanan vicariance and 
showcases the evolutionary lability of reproductive mode in the family. Within 
the Neotropical clade of Peripatidae, though, we found that amino 
acid-translated sequence data masked nearly all phylogenetic signal, resulting 
in highly unstable and poorly supported relationships. Analyses using nucleotide 
sequence data were able to resolve many more relationships, though we still saw 
discordant phylogenetic signal between genes, probably indicative of a rapid, 
mid-Cretaceous radiation in the group. Finally, we hypothesize that the unique 
reproductive mode of placentotrophic viviparity found in all Neotropical 
peripatids may have facilitated the multiple inferred instances of over-water 
dispersal and establishment on oceanic islands.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab251
PMCID: PMC8662635
PMID: 34427671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


784. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3820-3831. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab159.

Enhanced Mutation Rate, Relaxed Selection, and the "Domino Effect" are 
associated with Gene Loss in Blattabacterium, A Cockroach Endosymbiont.

Kinjo Y(1), Lo N(2), Martín PV(1), Tokuda G(3), Pigolotti S(1), Bourguignon 
T(1).

Author information:
(1)Okinawa Institute of Science & Technology Graduate University, Tancha, 
Onna-son, Okinawa, Japan.
(2)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Tropical Biosphere Research Center, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, 
Okinawa, Japan.

Intracellular endosymbionts have reduced genomes that progressively lose genes 
at a timescale of tens of million years. We previously reported that gene loss 
rate is linked to mutation rate in Blattabacterium, however, the mechanisms 
causing gene loss are not yet fully understood. Here, we carried out comparative 
genomic analyses on the complete genome sequences of a representative set of 67 
Blattabacterium strains, with sizes ranging between 511 and 645 kb. We found 
that 200 of the 566 analyzed protein-coding genes were lost in at least one 
lineage of Blattabacterium, with the most extreme case being one gene that was 
lost independently in 24 lineages. We found evidence for three mechanisms 
influencing gene loss in Blattabacterium. First, gene loss rates were found to 
increase exponentially with the accumulation of substitutions. Second, genes 
involved in vitamin and amino acid metabolism experienced relaxed selection in 
Cryptocercus and Mastotermes, possibly triggered by their vertically inherited 
gut symbionts. Third, we found evidence of epistatic interactions among genes 
leading to a "domino effect" of gene loss within pathways. Our results highlight 
the complexity of the process of genome erosion in an endosymbiont.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab159
PMCID: PMC8382890
PMID: 34426845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


785. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3884-3897. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab055.

Ecological Specialization and Evolutionary Reticulation in Extant Hyaenidae.

Westbury MV(1)(2), Le Duc D(3)(4), Duchêne DA(2)(5), Krishnan A(6)(7), Prost 
S(8)(9), Rutschmann S(1), Grau JH(1)(10), Dalén L(11)(12), Weyrich A(13), Norén 
K(14), Werdelin L(15), Dalerum F(14)(16)(17), Schöneberg T(18), Hofreiter M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Institute of Biochemistry and 
Biology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany.
(2)Section for Evolutionary Genomics, The GLOBE Institute, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(6)National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER) Berhampur, Odisha, India.
(8)LOEWE-Center for Translational Biodiversity Genomics, Senckenberg, Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(9)South African National Biodiversity Institute, National Zoological Garden, 
Pretoria, South Africa.
(10)Amedes Genetics, amedes Medizinische Dienstleistungen, Berlin, Germany.
(11)Centre for Palaeogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden.
(12)Department of Bioinformatics and Genetics, Swedish Museum of Natural 
History, Stockholm, Sweden.
(13)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife 
Research (IZW), Berlin, Germany.
(14)Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(15)Department of Palaeobiology, Swedish Museum of Natural History, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(16)Research Unit of Biodiversity (UO-CSIC-PA), Mieres Campus, University of 
Oviedo, Mieres, Asturias, Spain.
(17)Mammal Research Institute, Department of Zoology and Entomology, University 
of Pretoria, South Africa.
(18)Rudolf Schönheimer Institute of Biochemistry, Molecular Biochemistry, 
Medical Faculty, Leipzig, Germany.

During the Miocene, Hyaenidae was a highly diverse family of Carnivora that has 
since been severely reduced to four species: the bone-cracking spotted, striped, 
and brown hyenas, and the specialized insectivorous aardwolf. Previous studies 
investigated the evolutionary histories of the spotted and brown hyenas, but 
little is known about the remaining two species. Moreover, the genomic 
underpinnings of scavenging and insectivory, defining traits of the extant 
species, remain elusive. Here, we generated an aardwolf genome and analyzed it 
together with the remaining three species to reveal their evolutionary 
relationships, genomic underpinnings of their scavenging and insectivorous 
lifestyles, and their respective genetic diversities and demographic histories. 
High levels of phylogenetic discordance suggest gene flow between the aardwolf 
lineage and the ancestral brown/striped hyena lineage. Genes related to immunity 
and digestion in the bone-cracking hyenas and craniofacial development in the 
aardwolf showed the strongest signals of selection, suggesting putative key 
adaptations to carrion and termite feeding, respectively. A family-wide 
expansion in olfactory receptor genes suggests that an acute sense of smell was 
a key early adaptation. Finally, we report very low levels of genetic diversity 
within the brown and striped hyenas despite no signs of inbreeding, putatively 
linked to their similarly slow decline in effective population size over the 
last ∼2 million years. High levels of genetic diversity and more stable 
population sizes through time are seen in the spotted hyena and aardwolf. Taken 
together, our findings highlight how ecological specialization can impact the 
evolutionary history, demographics, and adaptive genetic changes of an 
evolutionary lineage.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab055
PMCID: PMC8382907
PMID: 34426844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


786. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3864-3883. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab028.

Dietary Diversification and Specialization in Neotropical Bats Facilitated by 
Early Molecular Evolution.

Potter JHT(1), Davies KTJ(1), Yohe LR(2)(3), Sanchez MKR(4), Rengifo EM(5)(6), 
Struebig M(1), Warren K(1), Tsagkogeorga G(1), Lim BK(7), Dos Reis M(1), Dávalos 
LM(2)(8), Rossiter SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, 
USA.
(3)Department of Earth and Planetary Science, Yale University, 210 Whitney Ave, 
New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Escuela Profesional de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional de Piura, 
Piura, Peru.
(5)Escola Superior de Agricultura 'Luiz de Queiroz,' Centro de Energia Nuclear 
na Agricultura, Universidade de São Paulo, Piracicaba, Brazil.
(6)Centro de Investigación Biodiversidad Sostenible (BioS), Lima, Peru.
(7)Department of Natural History, Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Consortium for Inter-Disciplinary Environmental Research, Stony Brook 
University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4657.

Dietary adaptation is a major feature of phenotypic and ecological 
diversification, yet the genetic basis of dietary shifts is poorly understood. 
Among mammals, Neotropical leaf-nosed bats (family Phyllostomidae) show 
unmatched diversity in diet; from a putative insectivorous ancestor, 
phyllostomids have radiated to specialize on diverse food sources including 
blood, nectar, and fruit. To assess whether dietary diversification in this 
group was accompanied by molecular adaptations for changing metabolic demands, 
we sequenced 89 transcriptomes across 58 species and combined these with 
published data to compare ∼13,000 protein coding genes across 66 species. We 
tested for positive selection on focal lineages, including those inferred to 
have undergone dietary shifts. Unexpectedly, we found a broad signature of 
positive selection in the ancestral phyllostomid branch, spanning genes 
implicated in the metabolism of all major macronutrients, yet few positively 
selected genes at the inferred switch to plantivory. Branches corresponding to 
blood- and nectar-based diets showed selection in loci underpinning nitrogenous 
waste excretion and glycolysis, respectively. Intriguingly, patterns of 
selection in metabolism genes were mirrored by those in loci implicated in 
craniofacial remodeling, a trait previously linked to phyllostomid dietary 
specialization. Finally, we show that the null model of the widely-used 
branch-site test is likely to be misspecified, with the implication that the 
test is too conservative and probably under-reports true cases of positive 
selection. Our findings point to a complex picture of adaptive radiation, in 
which the evolution of new dietary specializations has been facilitated by early 
adaptations combined with the generation of new genetic variation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab028
PMCID: PMC8382914
PMID: 34426843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


787. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4655. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab232.

Corrigendum to: ASTRAL-Pro: Quartet-Based Species-Tree Inference despite 
Paralogy.

Zhang C, Scornavacca C, Molloy EK, Mirarab S.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3292-3307.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab232
PMCID: PMC8476140
PMID: 34417619


788. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4656. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab233.

Corrigendum to: Detecting Genetic Ancestry and Adaptation in the Taiwanese Han 
People.

Lo YH, Cheng HC, Hsiung CN, Yang SL, Wang HY, Peng CW, Chen CY, Lin KP, Kang ML, 
Chen CH, Chu HW, Lin CF, Lee MH, Liu Q, Satta Y, Lin CJ, Lin M, Chaw SM, Loo JH, 
Shen CY, Ko WY.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4149-4165.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab233
PMCID: PMC8476130
PMID: 34417613


789. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5359-5375. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab248.

Polygenic Adaptation and Clonal Interference Enable Sustained Diversity in 
Experimental Pseudomonas aeruginosa Populations.

Harris KB(1), Flynn KM(2), Cooper VS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, and Center for 
Evolutionary Biology and Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Biomedical Sciences, University of New 
Hampshire, Durham, NH, USA.

How biodiversity arises and can be maintained in asexual microbial populations 
growing on a single resource remains unclear. Many models presume that 
beneficial genotypes will outgrow others and purge variation via selective 
sweeps. Environmental structure like that found in biofilms, which are 
associated with persistence during infection and other stressful conditions, may 
oppose this process and preserve variation. We tested this hypothesis by 
evolving Pseudomonas aeruginosa populations in biofilm-promoting arginine media 
for 3 months, using both a bead model of the biofilm life cycle and planktonic 
serial transfer. Surprisingly, adaptation and diversification were mostly 
uninterrupted by fixation events that eliminate diversity, with hundreds of 
mutations maintained at intermediate frequencies. The exceptions included 
genotypes with mutator alleles that also accelerated genetic diversification. 
Despite the rarity of hard sweeps, a remarkable 40 genes acquired parallel 
mutations in both treatments and often among competing genotypes within a 
population. These incomplete soft sweeps include several transporters (including 
pitA, pntB, nosD, and pchF) suggesting adaptation to the growth media that 
becomes highly alkaline during growth. Further, genes involved in signal 
transduction (including gacS, aer2, bdlA, and PA14_71750) reflect likely 
adaptations to biofilm-inducing conditions. Contrary to evolution experiments 
that select mutations in a few genes, these results suggest that some 
environments may expose a larger fraction of the genome and select for many 
adaptations at once. Thus, even growth on a sole carbon source can lead to 
persistent genetic and phenotypic variation despite strong selection that would 
normally purge diversity.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab248
PMCID: PMC8662654
PMID: 34410431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


790. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5480-5490. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab247.

Recombination Facilitates Adaptive Evolution in Rhizobial Soil Bacteria.

Cavassim MIA(1)(2), Andersen SU(2), Bataillon T(1), Schierup MH(1).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Research Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus 8000, Denmark.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus 8000, 
Denmark.

Homologous recombination is expected to increase natural selection efficacy by 
decoupling the fate of beneficial and deleterious mutations and by readily 
creating new combinations of beneficial alleles. Here, we investigate how the 
proportion of amino acid substitutions fixed by adaptive evolution (α) depends 
on the recombination rate in bacteria. We analyze 3,086 core protein-coding 
sequences from 196 genomes belonging to five closely related species of the 
genus Rhizobium. These genes are found in all species and do not display any 
signs of introgression between species. We estimate α using the site frequency 
spectrum (SFS) and divergence data for all pairs of species. We evaluate the 
impact of recombination within each species by dividing genes into three equally 
sized recombination classes based on their average level of intragenic linkage 
disequilibrium. We find that α varies from 0.07 to 0.39 across species and is 
positively correlated with the level of recombination. This is both due to a 
higher estimated rate of adaptive evolution and a lower estimated rate of 
nonadaptive evolution, suggesting that recombination both increases the fixation 
probability of advantageous variants and decreases the probability of fixation 
of deleterious variants. Our results demonstrate that homologous recombination 
facilitates adaptive evolution measured by α in the core genome of prokaryote 
species in agreement with studies in eukaryotes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab247
PMCID: PMC8662638
PMID: 34410427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


791. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5255-5274. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab249.

Genome Fractionation and Loss of Heterozygosity in Hybrids and Polyploids: 
Mechanisms, Consequences for Selection, and Link to Gene Function.

Janko K(1)(2), Bartoš O(1)(3), Kočí J(1)(2), Roslein J(1)(2), Drdová EJ(4), 
Kotusz J(5), Eisner J(6), Mokrejš M(1)(7), Štefková-Kašparová E(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Fish Genetics, Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics of 
the Czech Academy of Sciences, Liběchov, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(4)Institute of Experimental Botany, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(5)Museum of Natural History, University of Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia in 
České Budějovice, České Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(7)IT4Innovations, VŠB-Technical University of Ostrava, Ostrava-Poruba, Czech 
Republic.
(8)Department of Genetics and Breeding, FAFNR, Czech University of Life Sciences 
Prague, Czech Republic.

Hybridization and genome duplication have played crucial roles in the evolution 
of many animal and plant taxa. The subgenomes of parental species undergo 
considerable changes in hybrids and polyploids, which often selectively 
eliminate segments of one subgenome. However, the mechanisms underlying these 
changes are not well understood, particularly when the hybridization is linked 
with asexual reproduction that opens up unexpected evolutionary pathways. To 
elucidate this problem, we compared published cytogenetic and RNAseq data with 
exome sequences of asexual diploid and polyploid hybrids between three fish 
species; Cobitis elongatoides, C. taenia, and C. tanaitica. Clonal genomes 
remained generally static at chromosome-scale levels but their heterozygosity 
gradually deteriorated at the level of individual genes owing to allelic 
deletions and conversions. Interestingly, the impact of both processes varies 
among animals and genomic regions depending on ploidy level and the properties 
of affected genes. Namely, polyploids were more tolerant to deletions than 
diploid asexuals where conversions prevailed, and genomic restructuring events 
accumulated preferentially in genes characterized by high transcription levels 
and GC-content, strong purifying selection and specific functions like 
interacting with intracellular membranes. Although hybrids were phenotypically 
more similar to C. taenia, we found that they preferentially retained C. 
elongatoides alleles. This demonstrates that favored subgenome is not 
necessarily the transcriptionally dominant one. This study demonstrated that 
subgenomes in asexual hybrids and polyploids evolve under a complex interplay of 
selection and several molecular mechanisms whose efficiency depends on the 
organism's ploidy level, as well as functional properties and parental ancestry 
of the genomic region.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab249
PMCID: PMC8662595
PMID: 34410426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


792. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5453-5471. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab245.

The Oldest Co-opted gag Gene of a Human Endogenous Retrovirus Shows 
Placenta-Specific Expression and Is Upregulated in Diffuse Large B-Cell 
Lymphomas.

Boso G(1), Fleck K(1), Carley S(1), Liu Q(1), Buckler-White A(1), Kozak CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National Institute of Allergy and 
Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Vertebrate genomes contain endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) that represent 
remnants of past germline infections by ancient retroviruses. Despite comprising 
8% of the human genome, the human ERVs (HERVs) do not encode a replication 
competent retrovirus. However, some HERV genes have been co-opted to serve host 
functions, most notably the viral envelope-derived syncytins involved in 
placentation. Here, we identify the oldest HERV intact gag gene with an open 
reading frame, gagV1. Its provirus contains an intact env, envV1, and the first 
open reading frame found in an HERV gag leader, pre-gagV1, which encodes a novel 
protein. This HERV is linked to a related gag gene, gagV3, and these three genes 
all show patterns of evolutionary conservation in primates. gagV1 and pre-gagV1 
orthologs are present in all simian primate lineages indicating that this HERV 
entered the germline of the common simian primate ancestor at least 43 Ma, 
whereas gagV3 is found in Old and New World monkeys. gagV1 and gagV3 have 
undergone recurrent gene conversion events and positive selection. Expression of 
gagV1, gagV3, and pre-gagV1 is restricted to the placenta in humans and macaques 
suggesting co-option for placenta-specific host functions. Transcriptomic 
analysis of human tumors also found upregulated levels of gagV1 transcripts in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. These findings suggest that these HERV-V genes 
may be useful markers for the most common type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and 
that they may have contributed to the successive domestications of env and gag 
genes in eutherians involved in the ongoing ERV-driven evolution of the 
placenta.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 2021.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab245
PMCID: PMC8662612
PMID: 34410386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


793. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4657. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab204.

Erratum to: Dietary Diversification and Specialization in Neotropical Bats 
Facilitated by Early Molecular Evolution.

Potter JHT, Davies KTJ, Yohe LR, Sanchez MKR, Rengifo EM, Struebig M, Warren K, 
Tsagkogeorga G, Lim BK, Reis MD, Dávalos LM, Rossiter SJ.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3864-3883.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab204
PMCID: PMC8476151
PMID: 34405236


794. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5211-5224. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab246.

Recovery of Deleted Deep Sequencing Data Sheds More Light on the Early Wuhan 
SARS-CoV-2 Epidemic.

Bloom JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Seattle, WA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Sep 1;40(9):

The origin and early spread of SARS-CoV-2 remains shrouded in mystery. Here, I 
identify a data set containing SARS-CoV-2 sequences from early in the Wuhan 
epidemic that has been deleted from the NIH's Sequence Read Archive. I recover 
the deleted files from the Google Cloud and reconstruct partial sequences of 13 
early epidemic viruses. Phylogenetic analysis of these sequences in the context 
of carefully annotated existing data further supports the idea that the Huanan 
Seafood Market sequences are not fully representative of the viruses in Wuhan 
early in the epidemic. Instead, the progenitor of currently known SARS-CoV-2 
sequences likely contained three mutations relative to the market viruses that 
made it more similar to SARS-CoV-2's bat coronavirus relatives.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab246
PMCID: PMC8436388
PMID: 34398234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author consults for Moderna on SARS-CoV-2 
evolution and epidemiology, consults for Flagship Labs 77 on viral evolution and 
deep mutational scanning, and has the potential to receive a share of IP revenue 
as an inventor on a Fred Hutch licensed technology/patent (application 
WO2020006494) related to deep mutational scanning of viral proteins.


795. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5528-5538. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab242.

Ancient Gene Duplications, Rather Than Polyploidization, Facilitate 
Diversification of Petal Pigmentation Patterns in Clarkia gracilis (Onagraceae).

Lin RC(1)(2), Rausher MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States.
(2)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

It has been suggested that gene duplication and polyploidization create 
opportunities for the evolution of novel characters. However, the connections 
between the effects of polyploidization and morphological novelties have rarely 
been examined. In this study, we investigated whether petal pigmentation 
patterning in an allotetraploid Clarkia gracilis has evolved as a result of 
polyploidization. Clarkia gracilis is thought to be derived through a recent 
polyploidization event with two diploid species, C. amoena huntiana and an 
extinct species that is closely related to C. lassenensis. We reconstructed 
phylogenetic relationships of the R2R3-MYBs (the regulators of petal 
pigmentation) from two subspecies of C. gracilis and the two purported 
progenitors, C. a. huntiana and C. lassenensis. The gene tree reveals that these 
R2R3-MYB genes have arisen through duplications that occurred before the 
divergence of the two progenitor species, that is, before polyploidization. 
After polyploidization and subsequent gene loss, only one of the two orthologous 
copies inherited from the progenitors was retained in the polyploid, turning it 
to diploid inheritance. We examined evolutionary changes in these R2R3-MYBs and 
in their expression, which reveals that the changes affecting patterning 
(including expression domain contraction, loss-of-function mutation, 
cis-regulatory mutation) occurred after polyploidization within the C. gracilis 
lineages. Our results thus suggest that polyploidization itself is not necessary 
in producing novel petal color patterns. By contrast, duplications of R2R3-MYB 
genes in the common ancestor of the two progenitors have apparently facilitated 
diversification of petal pigmentation patterns.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab242
PMCID: PMC8662608
PMID: 34398232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


796. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5144-5155. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab241.

Noncoding Variation and Transcriptional Plasticity Promote Thermal Adaptation in 
Oysters by Altering Energy Metabolism.

Li A(1)(2)(3), Li L(1)(3)(4)(5), Zhang Z(1)(3)(5), Li S(6)(7), Wang W(1)(3)(4), 
Guo X(8), Zhang G(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS and Shandong Province Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, 
Center for Ocean Mega-Science, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Qingdao, China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Pilot National Laboratory 
for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China.
(3)National & Local Joint Engineering Key Laboratory of Ecological Mariculture, 
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China.
(4)Laboratory for Marine Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Pilot 
National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China.
(5)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(6)BGI Genomics, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(7)BGI-Argo Seed Service (Wuhan) Co., Ltd, Wuhan, China.
(8)Haskin Shellfish Research Laboratory, Department of Marine and Coastal 
Sciences, Rutgers University, Port Norris, NJ, USA.

Genetic variation and phenotypic plasticity are both important to adaptive 
evolution. However, how they act together on particular traits remains poorly 
understood. Here, we integrated phenotypic, genomic, and transcriptomic data 
from two allopatric but closely related congeneric oyster species, Crassostrea 
angulata from southern/warm environments and Crassostrea gigas from 
northern/cold environments, to investigate the roles of genetic divergence and 
plasticity in thermal adaptation. Reciprocal transplantation experiments showed 
that both species had higher fitness in their native habitats than in nonnative 
environments, indicating strong adaptive divergence. The southern species 
evolved higher transcriptional plasticity, and the plasticity was adaptive, 
suggesting that increased plasticity is important for thermal adaptation to warm 
climates. Genome-wide comparisons between the two species revealed that genes 
under selection tended to respond to environmental changes and showed higher 
sequence divergence in noncoding regions. All genes under selection and related 
to energy metabolism exhibited habitat-specific expression with genes involved 
in ATP production and lipid catabolism highly expressed in warm/southern 
habitats, and genes involved in ATP consumption and lipid synthesis were highly 
expressed in cold/northern habitats. The gene for acyl-CoA desaturase, a key 
enzyme for lipid synthesis, showed strong selective sweep in the upstream 
noncoding region and lower transcription in the southern species. These results 
were further supported by the lower free fatty acid (FFA) but higher ATP content 
in southern species and habitat, pointing to significance of ATP/FFA trade-off. 
Our findings provide evidence that noncoding variation and transcriptional 
plasticity play important roles in shaping energy metabolism for thermal 
adaptation in oysters.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab241
PMCID: PMC8557435
PMID: 34390581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


797. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5122-5126. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab239.

Is the Genetic Code Optimized for Resource Conservation?

Xu H(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.

The causes and consequences of the nonrandom structure of the standard genetic 
code (SGC) have been of long-standing interest. A recent study reported that 
mutations in present-day protein-coding sequences are less likely to increase 
proteomic nitrogen and carbon uses under the SGC than under random genetic 
codes, concluding that the SGC has been selectively optimized for resource 
conservation. If true, this finding might offer important information on the 
environment in which the SGC and some of the earliest life forms evolved. 
However, we here show that the hypothesis of optimization of a genetic code for 
resource conservation is theoretically untenable. We discover that the 
aforementioned study estimated the expected mutational effect by inappropriately 
excluding mutations lowering resource consumptions and including mutations 
involving stop codons. After remedying these problems, we find no evidence that 
the SGC is optimized for nitrogen or carbon conservation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab239
PMCID: PMC8557414
PMID: 34383940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


798. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5107-5121. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab238.

Papua New Guinean Genomes Reveal the Complex Settlement of North Sahul.

Brucato N(1), André M(1)(2), Tsang R(3)(4), Saag L(2), Kariwiga J(4)(5), Sesuki 
K(4), Beni T(4), Pomat W(6), Muke J(7), Meyer V(8), Boland A(8), Deleuze JF(8), 
Sudoyo H(9), Mondal M(2), Pagani L(2)(10), Gallego Romero I(11), Metspalu M(2), 
Cox MP(12), Leavesley M(4)(13)(14), Ricaut FX(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Évolution and Diversité Biologique (EDB UMR 5174), Université de 
Toulouse Midi-Pyrénées, CNRS, IRD, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(2)Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Tartumaa, Estonia.
(3)School of Humanities, Languages and Social Science and Place, Evolution and 
Rock Art Heritage Unit, Griffith University Centre for Social and Cultural 
Research, Griffith University, Australia.
(4)Strand of Anthropology, Sociology and Archaeology, School of Humanities and 
Social Sciences, University of Papua New Guinea, National Capital District, 
Papua New Guinea.
(5)School of Social Science, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland, 
Australia.
(6)Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Goroka, Papua New Guinea.
(7)Social Research Institute, Papua New Guinea.
(8)Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, Université Paris-Saclay, 
CEA, Evry, France.
(9)Genome Diversity and Diseases Laboratory, Eijkman Institute for Molecular 
Biology, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(10)Department of Biology, University of Padua, Padova, Italy.
(11)Melbourne Integrative Genomics, University of Melbourne, Australia.
(12)Statistics and Bioinformatics Group, School of Fundamental Sciences, Massey 
University, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
(13)College of Arts, Society and Education, James Cook University, Cairns, 
Queensland, Australia.
(14)ARC Centre of Excellence for Australian Biodiversity and Heritage, 
University of Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.

The settlement of Sahul, the lost continent of Oceania, remains one of the most 
ancient and debated human migrations. Modern New Guineans inherited a unique 
genetic diversity tracing back 50,000 years, and yet there is currently no model 
reconstructing their past population dynamics. We generated 58 new whole-genome 
sequences from Papua New Guinea, filling geographical gaps in previous sampling, 
specifically to address alternative scenarios of the initial migration to Sahul 
and the settlement of New Guinea. Here, we present the first genomic models for 
the settlement of northeast Sahul considering one or two migrations from 
Wallacea. Both models fit our data set, reinforcing the idea that ancestral 
groups to New Guinean and Indigenous Australians split early, potentially during 
their migration in Wallacea where the northern route could have been favored. 
The earliest period of human presence in Sahul was an era of interactions and 
gene flow between related but already differentiated groups, from whom all 
modern New Guineans, Bismarck islanders, and Indigenous Australians descend. The 
settlement of New Guinea was probably initiated from its southeast region, where 
the oldest archaeological sites have been found. This was followed by two 
migrations into the south and north lowlands that ultimately reached the west 
and east highlands. We also identify ancient gene flows between populations in 
New Guinea, Australia, East Indonesia, and the Bismarck Archipelago, emphasizing 
the fact that the anthropological landscape during the early period of Sahul 
settlement was highly dynamic rather than the traditional view of extensive 
isolation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab238
PMCID: PMC8557464
PMID: 34383935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


799. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5134-5143. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab240.

Fold Evolution before LUCA: Common Ancestry of SH3 Domains and OB Domains.

Alvarez-Carreño C(1)(2), Penev PI(1)(3), Petrov AS(1)(2), Williams LD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)NASA Center for the Origin of Life, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 
GA, USA.
(2)School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.

SH3 and OB are the simplest, oldest, and most common protein domains within the 
translation system. SH3 and OB domains are β-barrels that are structurally 
similar but are topologically distinct. To transform an OB domain to a SH3 
domain, β-strands must be permuted in a multistep and evolutionarily implausible 
mechanism. Here, we explored relationships between SH3 and OB domains of 
ribosomal proteins, initiation, and elongation factors using a combined 
sequence- and structure-based approach. We detect a common core of SH3 and OB 
domains, as a region of significant structure and sequence similarity. The 
common core contains four β-strands and a loop, but omits the fifth β-strand, 
which is variable and is absent from some OB and SH3 domain proteins. The 
structure of the common core immediately suggests a simple permutation mechanism 
for interconversion between SH3 and OB domains, which appear to share an 
ancestor. The OB domain was formed by duplication and adaptation of the SH3 
domain core, or vice versa, in a simple and probable transformation. By 
employing the folding algorithm AlphaFold2, we demonstrated that an ancestral 
reconstruction of a permuted SH3 sequence folds into an OB structure, and an 
ancestral reconstruction of a permuted OB sequence folds into a SH3 structure. 
The tandem SH3 and OB domains in the universal ribosomal protein uL2 share a 
common ancestor, suggesting that the divergence of these two domains occurred 
before the last universal common ancestor.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab240
PMCID: PMC8557408
PMID: 34383917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


800. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5092-5106. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab237.

Coevolution between MHC Class I and Antigen-Processing Genes in Salamanders.

Palomar G(1), Dudek K(1), Migalska M(1), Arntzen JW(2)(3), Ficetola GF(4)(5), 
Jelić D(6), Jockusch E(7), Martínez-Solano I(8), Matsunami M(9), Shaffer 
HB(10)(11), Vörös J(12), Waldman B(13)(14), Wielstra B(2)(3), Babik W(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Jagiellonian 
University, Kraków, Poland.
(2)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Environmental Sciences and Policy, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy.
(5)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Alpine (LECA), CNRS, Université Grenoble Alpes and 
Université Savoie Mont Blanc, Grenoble, France.
(6)Croatian Institute for Biodiversity, Zagreb, Croatia.
(7)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA.
(8)Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales (MNCN), Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(9)Department of Advanced Genomic and Laboratory Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan.
(10)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(11)La Kretz Center for California Conservation Science, Institute of the 
Environment and Sustainability, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Zoology, Hungarian Natural History Museum, Budapest, Hungary.
(13)Department of Integrative Biology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK, USA.
(14)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, South 
Korea.

Proteins encoded by antigen-processing genes (APGs) provide major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I (MHC-I) with antigenic peptides. In 
mammals, polymorphic multigenic MHC-I family is served by monomorphic APGs, 
whereas in certain nonmammalian species both MHC-I and APGs are polymorphic and 
coevolve within stable haplotypes. Coevolution was suggested as an ancestral 
gnathostome feature, presumably enabling only a single highly expressed 
classical MHC-I gene. In this view coevolution, while optimizing some aspects of 
adaptive immunity, would also limit its flexibility by preventing the expansion 
of classical MHC-I into a multigene family. However, some nonmammalian taxa, 
such as salamanders, have multiple highly expressed MHC-I genes, suggesting 
either that coevolution is relaxed or that it does not prevent the establishment 
of multigene MHC-I. To distinguish between these two alternatives, we use 
salamanders (30 species from 16 genera representing six families) to test, 
within a comparative framework, a major prediction of the coevolution 
hypothesis: the positive correlation between MHC-I and APG diversity. We found 
that MHC-I diversity explained both within-individual and species-wide diversity 
of two APGs, TAP1 and TAP2, supporting their coevolution with MHC-I, whereas no 
consistent effect was detected for the other three APGs (PSMB8, PSMB9, and 
TAPBP). Our results imply that although coevolution occurs in salamanders, it 
does not preclude the expansion of the MHC-I gene family. Contrary to the 
previous suggestions, nonmammalian vertebrates thus may be able to accommodate 
diverse selection pressures with flexibility granted by rapid expansion or 
contraction of the MHC-I family, while retaining the benefits of coevolution 
between MHC-I and TAPs.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab237
PMCID: PMC8557411
PMID: 34375431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


801. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5127-5133. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab236.

Little Evidence the Standard Genetic Code Is Optimized for Resource 
Conservation.

Rozhoňová H(1)(2), Payne JL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Quartier UNIL-Sorge, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

Selection for resource conservation can shape the coding sequences of organisms 
living in nutrient-limited environments. Recently, it was proposed that 
selection for resource conservation, specifically for nitrogen and carbon 
content, has also shaped the structure of the standard genetic code, such that 
the missense mutations the code allows tend to cause small increases in the 
number of nitrogen and carbon atoms in amino acids. Moreover, it was proposed 
that this optimization is not confounded by known optimizations of the standard 
genetic code, such as for polar requirement or hydropathy. We challenge these 
claims. We show the proposed optimization for nitrogen conservation is highly 
sensitive to choice of null model and the proposed optimization for carbon 
conservation is confounded by the known conservative nature of the standard 
genetic code with respect to the molecular volume of amino acids. There is 
therefore little evidence the standard genetic code is optimized for resource 
conservation. We discuss our findings in the context of null models of the 
standard genetic code.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab236
PMCID: PMC8557452
PMID: 34373928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


802. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5082-5091. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab235.

RdRp or RT, That is the Question.

Peyambari M(1), Guan S(2), Roossinck MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, Millennium Science Complex, 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.
(2)New England Biolabs, Inc, Ipswich, MA, USA.

The RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) of all known double-stranded RNA viruses 
is located within the viral particle and is responsible for the transcription 
and replication of the viral genome. Through an RT-PCR assay, we determined that 
purified virions, in vitro translated RdRp proteins, and purified recombinant 
RdRp proteins of partitiviruses also have reverse transcriptase (RT) function. 
We show that partitivirus RdRps 1) synthesized DNA from homologous and 
heterologous dsRNA templates; 2) are active using both ssRNA and dsRNA 
templates; and 3) are active at lower temperatures compared to an optimal 
reaction temperature of commercial RT enzymes. This finding poses an intriguing 
question: why do partitiviruses, with dsRNA genomes, have a polymerase with RT 
functions? In comparison, 3Dpol, the RdRp of poliovirus, did not show any RT 
activity. Our findings lead us to propose a new evolutionary model for RNA 
viruses where the RdRp of dsRNA viruses could be the ancestor of RdRps.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab235
PMCID: PMC8557412
PMID: 34352104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


803. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5204-5208. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab234.

Orthology Clusters from Gene Trees with Possvm.

Grau-Bové X(1)(2), Sebé-Pedrós A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Possvm (Phylogenetic Ortholog Sorting with Species oVerlap and MCL [Markov 
clustering algorithm]) is a tool that automates the process of identifying 
clusters of orthologous genes from precomputed phylogenetic trees and 
classifying gene families. It identifies orthology relationships between genes 
using the species overlap algorithm to infer taxonomic information from the gene 
tree topology, and then uses the MCL to identify orthology clusters and provide 
annotated gene families. Our benchmarking shows that this approach, when 
provided with accurate phylogenies, is able to identify manually curated 
orthogroups with very high precision and recall. Overall, Possvm automates the 
routine process of gene tree inspection and annotation in a highly interpretable 
manner, and provides reusable outputs and phylogeny-aware gene annotations that 
can be used to inform comparative genomics and gene family evolution analyses.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab234
PMCID: PMC8557443
PMID: 34352080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


804. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5051-5065. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab230.

Human-Mediated Admixture and Selection Shape the Diversity on the Modern Swine 
(Sus scrofa) Y Chromosomes.

Ai H(1), Zhang M(1), Yang B(1), Goldberg A(2), Li W(1), Ma J(1), Brandt D(3), 
Zhang Z(1), Nielsen R(3), Huang L(1).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory for Swine Genetic Improvement and Production 
Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, Jiangxi Province, P.R. 
China.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.

Throughout its distribution across Eurasia, domestic pig (Sus scrofa) 
populations have acquired differences through natural and artificial selection, 
and have often interbred. We resequenced 80 Eurasian pigs from nine different 
Asian and European breeds; we identify 42,288 reliable SNPs on the Y chromosome 
in a panel of 103 males, among which 96.1% are newly detected. Based on these 
new data, we elucidate the evolutionary history of pigs through the lens of the 
Y chromosome. We identify two highly divergent haplogroups: one present only in 
Asia and one fixed in Europe but present in some Asian populations. Analyzing 
the European haplotypes present in Asian populations, we find evidence of three 
independent waves of introgression from Europe to Asia in last 200 years, 
agreeing well with the literature and historical records. The diverse European 
lineages were brought in China by humans and left significant imprints not only 
on the autosomes but also on the Y chromosome of geographically and genetically 
distinct Chinese pig breeds. We also find a general excess of European ancestry 
on Y chromosomes relative to autosomes in Chinese pigs, an observation that 
cannot be explained solely by sex-biased migration and genetic drift. The 
European Y haplotype is associated with leaner meat production, and we 
hypothesize that the European Y chromosome increased in frequency in Chinese 
populations due to artificial selection. We find evidence of Y chromosomal gene 
flow between Sumatran wild boar and Chinese pigs. Our results demonstrate how 
human-mediated admixture and selection shaped the distribution of modern swine Y 
chromosomes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab230
PMCID: PMC8557463
PMID: 34343337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


805. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4674-4682. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab227.

Evolutionary Sparse Learning for Phylogenomics.

Kumar S(1)(2)(3), Sharma S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Excellence in Genome Medicine and Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

We introduce a supervised machine learning approach with sparsity constraints 
for phylogenomics, referred to as evolutionary sparse learning (ESL). ESL builds 
models with genomic loci-such as genes, proteins, genomic segments, and 
positions-as parameters. Using the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection 
Operator, ESL selects only the most important genomic loci to explain a given 
phylogenetic hypothesis or presence/absence of a trait. ESL models do not 
directly involve conventional parameters such as rates of substitutions between 
nucleotides, rate variation among positions, and phylogeny branch lengths. 
Instead, ESL directly employs the concordance of variation across sequences in 
an alignment with the evolutionary hypothesis of interest. ESL provides a 
natural way to combine different molecular and nonmolecular data types and 
incorporate biological and functional annotations of genomic loci in model 
building. We propose positional, gene, function, and hypothesis sparsity scores, 
illustrate their use through an example, and suggest several applications of 
ESL. The ESL framework has the potential to drive the development of a new class 
of computational methods that will complement traditional approaches in 
evolutionary genomics, particularly for identifying influential loci and 
sequences given a phylogeny and building models to test hypotheses. ESL's fast 
computational times and small memory footprint will also help democratize big 
data analytics and improve scientific rigor in phylogenomics.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab227
PMCID: PMC8557465
PMID: 34343318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


806. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4658. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab167.

Erratum to: Role of Sex-Concordant Gene Expression in the Coevolution of 
Exaggerated Male and Female Genitalia in a Beetle Group.

Nomura S, Fujisawa T, Sota T.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3593-3605.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab167
PMCID: PMC8476163
PMID: 34338779


807. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5034-5050. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab229.

Adaptive Introgression Facilitates Adaptation to High Latitudes in European 
Aspen (Populus tremula L.).

Rendón-Anaya M(1), Wilson J(1), Sveinsson S(2), Fedorkov A(3), Cottrell J(4), 
Bailey MES(5), Ruņis D(6), Lexer C(7), Jansson S(8), Robinson KM(8), Street 
NR(8), Ingvarsson PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Linnean Centre for Plant Biology, Department of Plant Biology, Uppsala 
BioCenter, Swedish University of Agricultural Science, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Matis Ltd, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(3)Institute of Biology, Komi Science Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Syktyvkar, Russia.
(4)Forest Research, Northern Research Station, Roslin, United Kingdom.
(5)School of Life Sciences, College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(6)Genetic Resource Centre, Latvian State Forest Research Institute "Silava", 
Salaspils, Latvia.
(7)Department of Botany and Biodiversity Research, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(8)Umeå Plant Science Centre, Department of Plant Physiology, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):

Understanding local adaptation has become a key research area given the ongoing 
climate challenge and the concomitant requirement to conserve genetic resources. 
Perennial plants, such as forest trees, are good models to study local 
adaptation given their wide geographic distribution, largely outcrossing mating 
systems, and demographic histories. We evaluated signatures of local adaptation 
in European aspen (Populus tremula) across Europe by means of whole-genome 
resequencing of a collection of 411 individual trees. We dissected admixture 
patterns between aspen lineages and observed a strong genomic mosaicism in 
Scandinavian trees, evidencing different colonization trajectories into the 
peninsula from Russia, Central and Western Europe. As a consequence of the 
secondary contacts between populations after the last glacial maximum, we 
detected an adaptive introgression event in a genome region of ∼500 kb in 
chromosome 10, harboring a large-effect locus that has previously been shown to 
contribute to adaptation to the short growing seasons characteristic of Northern 
Scandinavia. Demographic simulations and ancestry inference suggest an Eastern 
origin-probably Russian-of the adaptive Nordic allele which nowadays is present 
in a homozygous state at the north of Scandinavia. The strength of introgression 
and positive selection signatures in this region is a unique feature in the 
genome. Furthermore, we detected signals of balancing selection, shared across 
regional populations, that highlight the importance of standing variation as a 
primary source of alleles that facilitate local adaptation. Our results, 
therefore, emphasize the importance of migration-selection balance underlying 
the genetic architecture of key adaptive quantitative traits.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab229
PMCID: PMC8557470
PMID: 34329481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


808. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5066-5081. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab231.

The Chicken Pan-Genome Reveals Gene Content Variation and a Promoter Region 
Deletion in IGF2BP1 Affecting Body Size.

Wang K(1)(2), Hu H(3), Tian Y(1)(2), Li J(4), Scheben A(5), Zhang C(1)(2), Li 
Y(1)(2), Wu J(1)(2), Yang L(1)(2), Fan X(1)(2), Sun G(1)(2), Li D(1)(2), Zhang 
Y(1)(2), Han R(1)(2), Jiang R(1)(2), Huang H(1)(2), Yan F(2), Wang Y(2), Li 
Z(1)(2), Li G(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2), Li W(1)(2), Edwards D(3), Kang X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Henan Agricultural University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Henan Key Laboratory for Innovation and Utilization of Chicken Germplasm 
Resources, Zhengzhou, China.
(3)School of Biological Sciences and Institute of Agriculture, University of 
Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.
(4)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of 
Ministry of Education, College of Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong 
Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(5)Simons Center for Quantitative Biology, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold 
Spring Harbor, NY, USA.

Domestication and breeding have reshaped the genomic architecture of chicken, 
but the retention and loss of genomic elements during these evolutionary 
processes remain unclear. We present the first chicken pan-genome constructed 
using 664 individuals, which identified an additional approximately 66.5-Mb 
sequences that are absent from the reference genome (GRCg6a). The constructed 
pan-genome encoded 20,491 predicated protein-coding genes, of which higher 
expression levels are observed in conserved genes relative to dispensable genes. 
Presence/absence variation (PAV) analyses demonstrated that gene PAV in chicken 
was shaped by selection, genetic drift, and hybridization. PAV-based genome-wide 
association studies identified numerous candidate mutations related to growth, 
carcass composition, meat quality, or physiological traits. Among them, a 
deletion in the promoter region of IGF2BP1 affecting chicken body size is 
reported, which is supported by functional studies and extra samples. This is 
the first time to report the causal variant of chicken body size quantitative 
trait locus located at chromosome 27 which was repeatedly reported. Therefore, 
the chicken pan-genome is a useful resource for biological discovery and 
breeding. It improves our understanding of chicken genome diversity and provides 
materials to unveil the evolution history of chicken domestication.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab231
PMCID: PMC8557422
PMID: 34329477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


809. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5190-5203. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab226.

Refining Convergent Rate Analysis with Topology in Mammalian Longevity and 
Marine Transitions.

Treaster S(1)(2), Daane JM(1)(2)(3), Harris MP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Marine and Environmental Sciences, Northeastern University 
Marine Science Center, Nahant, MA, USA.

The quest to map the genetic foundations of phenotypes has been empowered by the 
modern diversity, quality, and availability of genomic resources. Despite these 
expanding resources, the abundance of variation within lineages makes it 
challenging to associate genetic change to specific phenotypes, without an a 
priori means of isolating the changes from background genomic variation. 
Evolution provides this means through convergence-that is, the shared variation 
that may result from replicate evolutionary experiments across independent trait 
occurrences. To leverage these opportunities, we developed TRACCER: 
Topologically Ranked Analysis of Convergence via Comparative Evolutionary Rates. 
Compared to current methods, this software empowers rate convergence analysis by 
factoring in topological relationships, because genetic variation between 
phylogenetically proximate trait changes is more likely to be facilitating the 
trait. Comparisons are performed not with singular branches, but with the 
complete paths to the most recent common ancestor for each pair of lineages. 
This ensures that comparisons represent a single context diverging over the same 
timeframe while obviating the problematic requirement of assigning ancestral 
states. We applied TRACCER to two case studies: mammalian transitions to marine 
environments, an unambiguous collection of traits that have independently 
evolved three times; and the evolution of mammalian longevity, a less delineated 
trait but with more instances to compare. By factoring in topology, TRACCER 
identifies highly significant, convergent genetic signals, with important 
incongruities and statistical resolution when compared to existing approaches. 
These improvements in sensitivity and specificity of convergence analysis 
generate refined targets for downstream validation and identification of 
genotype-phenotype relationships.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab226
PMCID: PMC8557430
PMID: 34324001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


810. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4962-4976. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab220.

Evolution of Renal-Disease Factor APOL1 Results in Cis and Trans Orientations at 
the Endoplasmic Reticulum That Both Show Cytotoxic Effects.

Müller D(1), Schmitz J(2), Fischer K(1), Granado D(1), Groh AC(1), Krausel V(1), 
Lüttgenau SM(1), Amelung TM(1), Pavenstädt H(1), Weide T(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine D (MedD), Molecular Nephrology, University Hospital of 
Münster (UKM), Münster, Germany.
(2)Institute of Experimental Pathology, ZMBE, University of Münster, Münster, 
Germany.

The recent and exclusively in humans and a few other higher primates expressed 
APOL1 (apolipoprotein L1) gene is linked to African human trypanosomiasis (also 
known as African sleeping sickness) as well as to different forms of kidney 
diseases. Whereas APOL1's role as a trypanolytic factor is well established, 
pathobiological mechanisms explaining its cytotoxicity in renal cells remain 
unclear. In this study, we compared the APOL family members using a combination 
of evolutionary studies and cell biological experiments to detect unique 
features causal for APOL1 nephrotoxic effects. We investigated available primate 
and mouse genome and transcriptome data to apply comparative phylogenetic and 
maximum likelihood selection analyses. We suggest that the APOL gene family 
evolved early in vertebrates and initial splitting occurred in ancestral 
mammals. Diversification and differentiation of functional domains continued in 
primates, including developing the two members APOL1 and APOL2. Their close 
relationship could be diagnosed by sequence similarity and a shared ancestral 
insertion of an AluY transposable element. Live-cell imaging analyses showed 
that both expressed proteins show a strong preference to localize at the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). However, glycosylation and secretion assays revealed 
that-unlike APOL2-APOL1 membrane insertion or association occurs in different 
orientations at the ER, with the disease-associated mutants facing either the 
luminal (cis) or cytoplasmic (trans) side of the ER. The various pools of APOL1 
at the ER offer a novel perspective in explaining the broad spectrum of its 
observed toxic effects.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab220
PMCID: PMC8557400
PMID: 34323996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


811. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5021-5033. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab228.

Novel Doublesex Duplication Associated with Sexually Dimorphic Development of 
Dogface Butterfly Wings.

Rodriguez-Caro F(1), Fenner J(2), Bhardwaj S(2), Cole J(3), Benson C(2), 
Colombara AM(2), Papa R(4), Brown MW(5), Martin A(6), Range RC(2), Counterman 
BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Austin, TX, 
USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras, San 
Juan, PR, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi 
State, MS, USA.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, The George Washington University, 
Washington, DC, USA.

Sexually dimorphic development is responsible for some of the most remarkable 
phenotypic variation found in nature. Alternative splicing of the transcription 
factor gene doublesex (dsx) is a highly conserved developmental switch 
controlling the expression of sex-specific pathways. Here, we leverage 
sex-specific differences in butterfly wing color pattern to characterize the 
genetic basis of sexually dimorphic development. We use RNA-seq, 
immunolocalization, and motif binding site analysis to test specific predictions 
about the role of dsx in the development of structurally based ultraviolet (UV) 
wing patterns in Zerene cesonia (Southern Dogface). Unexpectedly, we discover a 
novel duplication of dsx that shows a sex-specific burst of expression 
associated with the sexually dimorphic UV coloration. The derived copy consists 
of a single exon that encodes a DNA binding but no protein-binding domain and 
has experienced rapid amino-acid divergence. We propose the novel dsx paralog 
may suppress UV scale differentiation in females, which is supported by an 
excess of Dsx-binding sites at cytoskeletal and chitin-related genes with 
sex-biased expression. These findings illustrate the molecular flexibility of 
the dsx gene in mediating the differentiation of secondary sexual 
characteristics.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab228
PMCID: PMC8557438
PMID: 34323995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


812. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4992-5004. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab223.

Endogenous Retroviruses Drive Lineage-Specific Regulatory Evolution across 
Primate and Rodent Placentae.

Sun MA(1)(2)(3), Wolf G(1), Wang Y(4), Senft AD(1), Ralls S(1), Jin J(1), 
Dunn-Fletcher CE(5)(6), Muglia LJ(5)(7), Macfarlan TS(1).

Author information:
(1)The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institutes of Child Health and Human 
Development, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Institute of Comparative Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal 
Infectious Diseases and Zoonosis, Joint International Research Laboratory of 
Agriculture and Agri-Product Safety, The Ministry of Education of China, 
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(4)School of Basic Medicine, Shenzhen University Health Science Center, 
Shenzhen, China.
(5)Division of Human Genetics, Center for Prevention of Preterm Birth, Perinatal 
Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(6)Physician-Scientist Training Program in Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA.
(7)Burroughs Wellcome Fund, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

In mammals, the placenta mediates maternal-fetal nutrient and waste exchange and 
acts in an immunomodulatory way to facilitate maternal-fetal tolerance. The 
placenta is highly diverse across mammalian species, yet the molecular 
mechanisms that distinguish the placenta of human from other mammals are not 
fully understood. Using an interspecies transcriptomic comparison of human, 
macaque, and mouse late-gestation placentae, we identified hundreds of genes 
with lineage-specific expression-including dozens that are placentally enriched 
and potentially related to pregnancy. We further annotated the enhancers for 
different human tissues using epigenomic data and demonstrate that the placenta 
and chorion are unique in that their enhancers display the least conservation. 
We identified numerous lineage-specific human placental enhancers and found they 
highly overlap with specific families of endogenous retroviruses (ERVs), 
including MER21A, MER41A/B, and MER39B that were previously linked to immune 
response and placental function. Among these ERV families, we further 
demonstrate that MER41A/B insertions create dozens of lineage-specific serum 
response factor-binding loci in human, including one adjacent to FBN2, a 
placenta-specific gene with increased expression in humans that produces the 
peptide hormone placensin to stimulate glucose secretion and trophoblast 
invasion. Overall, our results demonstrate the prevalence of lineage-specific 
placental enhancers which are frequently associated with ERV insertions and 
likely facilitate the lineage-specific evolution of the mammalian placenta.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 2021.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab223
PMCID: PMC8557419
PMID: 34320657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


813. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5005-5020. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab225.

An Ancient Clade of Penelope-Like Retroelements with Permuted Domains Is Present 
in the Green Lineage and Protists, and Dominates Many Invertebrate Genomes.

Craig RJ(1), Yushenova IA(2), Rodriguez F(2), Arkhipova IR(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Josephine Bay Paul Center for Comparative Molecular Biology and Evolution, 
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA.

Penelope-like elements (PLEs) are an enigmatic clade of retrotransposons whose 
reverse transcriptases (RTs) share a most recent common ancestor with telomerase 
RTs. The single ORF of canonical endonuclease (EN)+ PLEs encodes RT and a 
C-terminal GIY-YIG EN that enables intrachromosomal integration, whereas EN- 
PLEs lack EN and are generally restricted to chromosome termini. EN+ PLEs have 
only been found in animals, except for one case of horizontal transfer to 
conifers, whereas EN- PLEs occur in several kingdoms. Here, we report a new, 
deep-branching PLE clade with a permuted domain order, whereby an N-terminal 
GIY-YIG EN is linked to a C-terminal RT by a short domain with a characteristic 
CxC motif. These N-terminal EN+ PLEs share a structural organization, including 
pseudo-LTRs and complex tandem/inverted insertions, with canonical EN+ PLEs from 
Penelope/Poseidon, Neptune, and Nematis clades, and show insertion bias for 
microsatellites, but lack canonical hammerhead ribozyme motifs. However, their 
phylogenetic distribution is much broader. The Naiads, found in numerous 
invertebrate phyla, can reach tens of thousands of copies per genome. In spiders 
and clams, Naiads independently evolved to encode selenoproteins containing 
multiple selenocysteines. Chlamys, which lack the CCHH motif universal to PLE 
ENs, occur in green algae, spike mosses (targeting ribosomal DNA), and slime 
molds. Unlike canonical PLEs, RTs of N-terminal EN+ PLEs contain the 
insertion-in-fingers domain (IFD), strengthening the link between PLEs and 
telomerases. Additionally, we describe Hydra, a novel metazoan C-terminal EN+ 
clade. Overall, we conclude that PLE diversity, taxonomic distribution, and 
abundance are comparable with non-LTR and LTR-retrotransposons.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab225
PMCID: PMC8557442
PMID: 34320655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


814. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4908-4917. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab216.

Genetic Continuity of Bronze Age Ancestry with Increased Steppe-Related Ancestry 
in Late Iron Age Uzbekistan.

Kumar V(1)(2), Bennett EA(1), Zhao D(3), Liang Y(3), Tang Y(3), Ren M(3), Dai 
Q(1), Feng X(1), Cao P(1), Yang R(1), Liu F(1), Ping W(1), Zhang M(1)(4), Ding 
M(1)(4), Yang MA(5), Amridin B(6), Muttalib H(6), Wang J(3), Fu Q(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Vertebrate Evolution and Human Origins, Institute of 
Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Center for Excellence in Life and 
Paleoenvironment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute, Shanghai 200232, China.
(3)School of Cultural Heritage, Northwest University, Xi'an, China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA, USA.
(6)Institute of Archaeology, Academy of Sciences of Uzbekistan, Samarkand, 
Uzbekistan.

Although Uzbekistan and Central Asia are known for the well-studied Bronze Age 
civilization of the Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC), the 
lesser-known Iron Age was also a dynamic period that resulted in increased 
interaction and admixture among different cultures from this region. To broaden 
our understanding of events that impacted the demography and population 
structure of this region, we generated 27 genome-wide single-nucleotide 
polymorphism capture data sets of Late Iron Age individuals around the 
Historical Kushan time period (∼2100-1500 BP) from three sites in South 
Uzbekistan. Overall, Bronze Age ancestry persists into the Iron Age in 
Uzbekistan, with no major replacements of populations with Steppe-related 
ancestry. However, these individuals suggest diverse ancestries related to 
Iranian farmers, Anatolian farmers, and Steppe herders, with a small amount of 
West European Hunter Gatherer, East Asian, and South Asian Hunter Gatherer 
ancestry as well. Genetic affinity toward the Late Bronze Age Steppe herders and 
a higher Steppe-related ancestry than that found in BMAC populations suggest an 
increased mobility and interaction of individuals from the Northern Steppe in a 
Southward direction. In addition, a decrease of Iranian and an increase of 
Anatolian farmer-like ancestry in Uzbekistan Iron Age individuals were observed 
compared with the BMAC populations from Uzbekistan. Thus, despite continuity 
from the Bronze Age, increased admixture played a major role in the shift from 
the Bronze to the Iron Age in southern Uzbekistan. This mixed ancestry is also 
observed in other parts of the Steppe and Central Asia, suggesting more 
widespread admixture among local populations.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab216
PMCID: PMC8557446
PMID: 34320653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


815. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4867-4883. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab212.

Two Reference-Quality Sea Snake Genomes Reveal Their Divergent Evolution of 
Adaptive Traits and Venom Systems.

Li A(1)(2), Wang J(1), Sun K(2), Wang S(3), Zhao X(1), Wang T(3), Xiong L(3), Xu 
W(2), Qiu L(2), Shang Y(4), Liu R(2), Wang S(1), Lu Y(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(3)School of Medicine, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Changhai Hospital, 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

True sea snakes (Hydrophiini) are among the last and most successful clades of 
vertebrates that show secondary marine adaptation, exhibiting diverse phenotypic 
traits and lethal venom systems. To better understand their evolution, we 
generated the first chromosome-level genomes of two representative Hydrophiini 
snakes, Hydrophis cyanocinctus and H. curtus. Through comparative genomics we 
identified a great expansion of the underwater olfaction-related V2R gene 
family, consisting of more than 1,000 copies in both snakes. A series of 
chromosome rearrangements and genomic structural variations were recognized, 
including large inversions longer than 30 megabase (Mb) on sex chromosomes which 
potentially affect key functional genes associated with differentiated 
phenotypes between the two species. By integrating multiomics we found a 
significant loss of the major weapon for elapid predation, three-finger toxin 
genes, which displayed a dosage effect in H. curtus. These genetic changes may 
imply mechanisms that drove the divergent evolution of adaptive traits including 
prey preferences between the two closely related snakes. Our reference-quality 
sea snake genomes also enrich the repositories for addressing important issues 
on the evolution of marine tetrapods, and provide a resource for discovering 
marine-derived biological products.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab212
PMCID: PMC8557462
PMID: 34320652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


816. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4987-4991. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab222.

Genome-Wide SNPs Clarify a Complex Radiation and Support Recognition of an 
Additional Cat Species.

Trindade FJ(1), Rodrigues MR(1)(2), Figueiró HV(1)(3), Li G(4)(5), Murphy WJ(4), 
Eizirik E(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)PUCRS, Escola de Ciências da Saúde e da Vida, Laboratório de Biologia 
Genômica e Molecular, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)USP, Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Institute of 
Biosciences, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Center for Species Survival, Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, 
National Zoological Park, Front Royal, VA, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA.
(5)College of Life Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(6)Instituto Pró-Carnívoros, Atibaia, SP, Brazil.

Phylogenetic reconstruction and species delimitation are often challenging in 
the case of recent evolutionary radiations, especially when postspeciation gene 
flow is present. Leopardus is a Neotropical cat genus that has a long history of 
recalcitrant taxonomic problems, along with both ancient and current episodes of 
interspecies admixture. Here, we employ genome-wide SNP data from all presently 
recognized Leopardus species, including several individuals from the tigrina 
complex (representing Leopardus guttulus and two distinct populations of 
Leopardus tigrinus), to investigate the evolutionary history of this genus. Our 
results reveal that the tigrina complex is paraphyletic, containing at least 
three distinct species. While one can be assigned to L. guttulus, the other two 
remain uncertain regarding their taxonomic assignment. Our findings indicate 
that the "tigrina" morphology may be plesiomorphic within this group, which has 
led to a longstanding taxonomic trend of lumping these poorly known felids into 
a single species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab222
PMCID: PMC8557425
PMID: 34320647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


817. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5175-5189. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab224.

Evolution-Based Protein Engineering for Antifungal Peptide Improvement.

Gu J(1)(2), Isozumi N(3), Yuan S(1)(2), Jin L(1)(2), Gao B(1), Ohki S(3), Zhu 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Group of Peptide Biology and Evolution, State Key Laboratory of Integrated 
Management of Pest Insects and Rodents, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Center for Nano Materials and Technology (CNMT), Japan Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology (JAIST), Ishikawa, Japan.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been considered as the alternatives to 
antibiotics because of their less susceptibility to microbial resistance. 
However, compared with conventional antibiotics they show relatively low 
activity and the consequent high cost and nonspecific cytotoxicity, hindering 
their clinical application. What's more, engineering of AMPs is a great 
challenge due to the inherent complexity in their sequence, structure, and 
function relationships. Here, we report an evolution-based strategy for 
improving the antifungal activity of a nematode-sourced defensin (Cremycin-5). 
This strategy utilizes a sequence-activity comparison between Cremycin-5 and its 
functionally diverged paralogs to identify sites associated with antifungal 
activity for screening of enhanceable activity-modulating sites for subsequent 
saturation mutagenesis. Using this strategy, we identified a site (Glu-15) whose 
mutations with nearly all other types of amino acids resulted in a universally 
enhanced activity against multiple fungal species, which is thereby defined as a 
Universally Enhanceable Activity-Modulating Site (UEAMS). Especially, Glu15Lys 
even exhibited >9-fold increased fungicidal potency against several clinical 
isolates of Candida albicans through inhibiting cytokinesis. This mutant showed 
high thermal and serum stability and quicker killing kinetics than clotrimazole 
without detectable hemolysis. Molecular dynamic simulations suggest that the 
mutations at the UEAMS likely limit the conformational flexibility of a distant 
functional residue via allostery, enabling a better peptide-fungus interaction. 
Further sequence, structural, and mutational analyses of the Cremycin-5 ortholog 
uncover an epistatic interaction between the UEAMS and another site that may 
constrain its evolution. Our work lights one new road to success of engineering 
AMP drug leads.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab224
PMCID: PMC8557468
PMID: 34320203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


818. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4647-4654. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab199.

BUSCO Update: Novel and Streamlined Workflows along with Broader and Deeper 
Phylogenetic Coverage for Scoring of Eukaryotic, Prokaryotic, and Viral Genomes.

Manni M(1)(2), Berkeley MR(1)(2), Seppey M(1)(2), Simão FA(1)(2), Zdobnov 
EM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Geneva, Switzerland.

Methods for evaluating the quality of genomic and metagenomic data are essential 
to aid genome assembly procedures and to correctly interpret the results of 
subsequent analyses. BUSCO estimates the completeness and redundancy of 
processed genomic data based on universal single-copy orthologs. Here, we 
present new functionalities and major improvements of the BUSCO software, as 
well as the renewal and expansion of the underlying data sets in sync with the 
OrthoDB v10 release. Among the major novelties, BUSCO now enables phylogenetic 
placement of the input sequence to automatically select the most appropriate 
BUSCO data set for the assessment, allowing the analysis of metagenome-assembled 
genomes of unknown origin. A newly introduced genome workflow increases the 
efficiency and runtimes especially on large eukaryotic genomes. BUSCO is the 
only tool capable of assessing both eukaryotic and prokaryotic species, and can 
be applied to various data types, from genome assemblies and metagenomic bins, 
to transcriptomes and gene sets.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab199
PMCID: PMC8476166
PMID: 34320186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


819. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4683-4699. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab194.

Genomic Evidence for Speciation with Gene Flow in Broadcast Spawning Marine 
Invertebrates.

Hirase S(1), Yamasaki YY(2), Sekino M(3), Nishisako M(4), Ikeda M(4), Hara M(5), 
Merilä J(6)(7), Kikuchi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Fisheries Laboratory, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Maisaka, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan.
(2)Ecological Genetics Laboratory, Department of Genomics and Evolutionary 
Biology, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Bioinformatics and Biosciences Division, Fisheries Resources Institute, Japan 
Fisheries Research and Education Agency, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Integrative Aquatic Biology, Graduate School of Agricultural 
Sciences, Tohoku University, Onagawa, Miyagi, Japan.
(5)Tohoku Ecosystem-Associated Marine Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, 
Miyagi, Japan.
(6)Ecological Genetics Research Unit, Organismal and Evolutionary Biology 
Research Programme, Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University 
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Research Division of Ecology and Biodiversity, Faculty of Sciences, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

How early stages of speciation in free-spawning marine invertebrates proceed is 
poorly understood. The Western Pacific abalones, Haliotis discus, H. madaka, and 
H. gigantea, occur in sympatry with shared breeding season and are capable of 
producing viable F1 hybrids in spite of being ecologically differentiated. 
Population genomic analyses revealed that although the three species are 
genetically distinct, there is evidence for historical and ongoing gene flow 
among these species. Evidence from demographic modeling suggests that 
reproductive isolation among the three species started to build in allopatry and 
has proceeded with gene flow, possibly driven by ecological selection. We 
identified 27 differentiation islands between the closely related H. discus and 
H. madaka characterized by high FST and dA, but not high dXY values, as well as 
high genetic diversity in one H. madaka population. These genomic signatures 
suggest differentiation driven by recent ecological divergent selection in 
presence of gene flow outside of the genomic islands of differentiation. The 
differentiation islands showed low polymorphism in H. gigantea, and both high 
FST, dXY, and dA values between H. discus and H. gigantea, as well as between H. 
madaka and H. gigantea. Collectively, the Western Pacific abalones appear to 
occupy the early stages speciation continuum, and the differentiation islands 
associated with ecological divergence among the abalones do not appear to have 
acted as barrier loci to gene flow in the younger divergences but appear to do 
so in older divergences.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab194
PMCID: PMC8557453
PMID: 34311468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


820. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4977-4986. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab221.

Defective Satellite DNA Clustering into Chromocenters Underlies Hybrid 
Incompatibility in Drosophila.

Jagannathan M(1), Yamashita YM(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA.
(3)Whitehead Institute and Department of Biology, MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Although rapid evolution of pericentromeric satellite DNA repeats is theorized 
to promote hybrid incompatibility (HI) (Yunis and Yasmineh 1971; Henikoff et al. 
2001; Ferree and Barbash 2009; Sawamura 2012; Jagannathan and Yamashita 2017), 
how divergent repeats affect hybrid cells remains poorly understood. Recently, 
we demonstrated that sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins cluster satellite 
DNA from multiple chromosomes into "chromocenters," thereby bundling chromosomes 
to maintain the entire genome in a single nucleus (Jagannathan et al. 2018, 
2019). Here, we show that ineffective clustering of divergent satellite DNA in 
the cells of Drosophila hybrids results in chromocenter disruption, associated 
micronuclei formation, and tissue atrophy. We further demonstrate that 
previously identified HI factors trigger chromocenter disruption and micronuclei 
in hybrids, linking their function to a conserved cellular process. Together, we 
propose a unifying framework that explains how the widely observed satellite DNA 
divergence between closely related species can cause reproductive isolation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab221
PMCID: PMC8557456
PMID: 34302471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


821. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4948-4961. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab219.

Comparative Analysis of Mammal Genomes Unveils Key Genomic Variability for Human 
Life Span.

Farré X(1), Molina R(2), Barteri F(1), Timmers PRHJ(3)(4), Joshi PK(4), Oliva 
B(2), Acosta S(1), Esteve-Altava B(1), Navarro A(1)(5)(6)(7), Muntané G(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Institute of Evolutionary 
Biology (UPF-CSIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Structural Bioinformatics Lab, Department of Experimental and Health 
Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics & Molecular Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)Centre for Global Health Research, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(5)Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center (BBRC), Pasqual Maragall Foundation, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Hospital Universitari Institut Pere Mata, IISPV, Universitat Rovira i 
Virgili, Biomedical Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Reus, 
Spain.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Dec 5;39(12):

The enormous mammal's lifespan variation is the result of each species' 
adaptations to their own biological trade-offs and ecological conditions. 
Comparative genomics have demonstrated that genomic factors underlying both, 
species lifespans and longevity of individuals, are in part shared across the 
tree of life. Here, we compared protein-coding regions across the mammalian 
phylogeny to detect individual amino acid (AA) changes shared by the most 
long-lived mammals and genes whose rates of protein evolution correlate with 
longevity. We discovered a total of 2,737 AA in 2,004 genes that distinguish 
long- and short-lived mammals, significantly more than expected by chance 
(P = 0.003). These genes belong to pathways involved in regulating lifespan, 
such as inflammatory response and hemostasis. Among them, a total 1,157 AA 
showed a significant association with maximum lifespan in a phylogenetic test. 
Interestingly, most of the detected AA positions do not vary in extant human 
populations (81.2%) or have allele frequencies below 1% (99.78%). Consequently, 
almost none of these putatively important variants could have been detected by 
genome-wide association studies. Additionally, we identified four more genes 
whose rate of protein evolution correlated with longevity in mammals. Crucially, 
SNPs located in the detected genes explain a larger fraction of human lifespan 
heritability than expected, successfully demonstrating for the first time that 
comparative genomics can be used to enhance interpretation of human genome-wide 
association studies. Finally, we show that the human longevity-associated 
proteins are significantly more stable than the orthologous proteins from 
short-lived mammals, strongly suggesting that general protein stability is 
linked to increased lifespan.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab219
PMCID: PMC8557403
PMID: 34297086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


822. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4934-4947. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab218.

Functional Evolution of a Bark Beetle Odorant Receptor Clade Detecting 
Monoterpenoids of Different Ecological Origins.

Hou XQ(1), Yuvaraj JK(1), Roberts RE(1), Zhang DD(1), Unelius CR(2), Löfstedt 
C(1), Andersson MN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life 
Sciences, Linnaeus University, Kalmar, Sweden.

Insects detect odors using an array of odorant receptors (ORs), which may expand 
through gene duplication. How and which new functions may evolve among related 
ORs within a species remain poorly investigated. We addressed this question by 
functionally characterizing ORs from the Eurasian spruce bark beetle Ips 
typographus, in which physiological and behavioral responses to pheromones, 
volatiles from host and nonhost trees, and fungal symbionts are well described. 
In contrast, knowledge of OR function is restricted to two receptors detecting 
the pheromone compounds (S)-(-)-ipsenol (ItypOR46) and (R)-(-)-ipsdienol 
(ItypOR49). These receptors belong to an Ips-specific OR-lineage comprising 
seven ItypORs. To gain insight into the functional evolution of related ORs, we 
characterized the five remaining ORs in this clade using Xenopus oocytes. Two 
receptors responded primarily to the host tree monoterpenes (+)-3-carene 
(ItypOR25) and p-cymene (ItypOR27). Two receptors responded to oxygenated 
monoterpenoids produced in larger relative amounts by the beetle-associated 
fungi, with ItypOR23 specific for (+)-trans-(1R, 4S)-4-thujanol, and ItypOR29 
responding to (+)-isopinocamphone and similar ketones. ItypOR28 responded to the 
pheromone E-myrcenol from the competitor Ips duplicatus. Overall, the OR 
responses match well with those of previously characterized olfactory sensory 
neuron classes except that neurons detecting E-myrcenol have not been 
identified. The characterized ORs are under strong purifying selection and 
demonstrate a shared functional property in that they all primarily respond to 
monoterpenoids. The variation in functional groups among OR ligands and their 
diverse ecological origins suggest that neofunctionalization has occurred early 
in the evolution of this OR-lineage following gene duplication.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab218
PMCID: PMC8557457
PMID: 34293158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


823. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4891-4907. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab215.

Sexual Antagonism, Temporally Fluctuating Selection, and Variable Dominance 
Affect a Regulatory Polymorphism in Drosophila melanogaster.

Glaser-Schmitt A(1), Wittmann MJ(2), Ramnarine TJS(1), Parsch J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Faculty of Biology, Department of Theoretical Biology, Bielefeld University, 
Bielefeld, Germany.

Understanding how genetic variation is maintained within species is a major goal 
of evolutionary genetics that can shed light on the preservation of 
biodiversity. Here, we examined the maintenance of a regulatory 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of the X-linked Drosophila melanogaster 
gene fezzik. The derived variant at this site is at intermediate frequency in 
many worldwide populations but absent in populations from the ancestral species 
range in sub-Saharan Africa. We collected and genotyped wild-caught individuals 
from a single European population biannually over a period of 5 years, which 
revealed an overall difference in allele frequency between the sexes and a 
consistent change in allele frequency across seasons in females but not in 
males. Modeling based on the observed allele and genotype frequencies suggested 
that both sexually antagonistic and temporally fluctuating selection may help 
maintain variation at this site. The derived variant is predicted to be 
female-beneficial and mostly recessive; however, there was uncertainty 
surrounding our dominance estimates and long-term modeling projections suggest 
that it is more likely to be dominant. By examining gene expression phenotypes, 
we found that phenotypic dominance was variable and dependent upon developmental 
stage and genetic background, suggesting that dominance may be variable at this 
locus. We further determined that fezzik expression and genotype are associated 
with starvation resistance in a sex-dependent manner, suggesting a potential 
phenotypic target of selection. By characterizing the mechanisms of selection 
acting on this SNP, our results improve our understanding of how selection 
maintains genetic and phenotypic variation in natural populations.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab215
PMCID: PMC8557461
PMID: 34289067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


824. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4884-4890. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab214.

Whole-Genome Sequencing Reveals Lactase Persistence Adaptation in European Dogs.

Liu YH(1), Wang L(2), Zhang Z(3), Otecko NO(1), Khederzadeh S(1), Dai Y(2), 
Liang B(2)(3)(4), Wang GD(1)(4)(5), Zhang YP(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Yunnan Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan, and School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(4)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(5)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming, Yunnan, China.

Coexistence and cooperation between dogs and humans over thousands of years have 
supported convergent evolutionary processes in the two species. Previous studies 
found that Eurasian dogs evolved into a distinct geographic cluster. In this 
study, we used the genomes of 242 European dogs, 38 Southeast Asian indigenous 
(SEAI) dogs, and 41 gray wolves to identify adaptation of European dogs . We 
report 86 unique positively selected genes in European dogs, among which is LCT 
(lactase). LCT encodes lactase, which is fundamental for the digestion of 
lactose. We found that an A-to-G mutation (chr19:38,609,592) is almost fixed in 
Middle Eastern and European dogs. The results of two-dimensional site frequency 
spectrum (2D SFS) support that the mutation is under soft sweep . We inferred 
that the onset of positive selection of the mutation is shorter than 6,535 years 
and behind the well-developed dairy economy in central Europe. It increases the 
expression of LCT by reducing its binding with ZEB1, which would enhance dog's 
ability to digest milk-based diets. Our study uncovers the genetic basis of 
convergent evolution between humans and dogs with respect to diet, emphasizing 
the import of the dog as a biomedical model for studying mechanisms of the 
digestive system.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab214
PMCID: PMC8557436
PMID: 34289055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


825. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4918-4933. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab217.

Balancing Selection for Pathogen Resistance Reveals an Intercontinental 
Signature of Red Queen Coevolution.

Bourgeois Y(1), Fields PD(1), Bento G(1), Ebert D(1).

Author information:
(1)Zoology, Department of Environmental Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.

The link between long-term host-parasite coevolution and genetic diversity is 
key to understanding genetic epidemiology and the evolution of resistance. The 
model of Red Queen host-parasite coevolution posits that high genetic diversity 
is maintained when rare host resistance variants have a selective advantage, 
which is believed to be the mechanistic basis for the extraordinarily high 
levels of diversity at disease-related genes such as the major 
histocompatibility complex in jawed vertebrates and R-genes in plants. The 
parasites that drive long-term coevolution are, however, often elusive. Here we 
present evidence for long-term balancing selection at the phenotypic (variation 
in resistance) and genomic (resistance locus) level in a particular 
host-parasite system: the planktonic crustacean Daphnia magna and the bacterium 
Pasteuria ramosa. The host shows widespread polymorphisms for pathogen 
resistance regardless of geographic distance, even though there is a clear 
genome-wide pattern of isolation by distance at other sites. In the genomic 
region of a previously identified resistance supergene, we observed consistent 
molecular signals of balancing selection, including higher genetic diversity, 
older coalescence times, and lower differentiation between populations, which 
set this region apart from the rest of the genome. We propose that specific 
long-term coevolution by negative-frequency-dependent selection drives this 
elevated diversity at the host's resistance loci on an intercontinental scale 
and provide an example of a direct link between the host's resistance to a 
virulent pathogen and the large-scale diversity of its underlying genes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab217
PMCID: PMC8557431
PMID: 34289047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


826. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4847-4866. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab211.

Nemertean, Brachiopod, and Phoronid Neuropeptidomics Reveals Ancestral Spiralian 
Signaling Systems.

Thiel D(1)(2), Yañez-Guerra LA(1), Franz-Wachtel M(3), Hejnol A(4), Jékely G(1).

Author information:
(1)Living Systems Institute, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(2)Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.
(3)Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

Neuropeptides are diverse signaling molecules in animals commonly acting through 
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). Neuropeptides and their receptors underwent 
extensive diversification in bilaterians and the relationships of many 
peptide-receptor systems have been clarified. However, we lack a detailed 
picture of neuropeptide evolution in lophotrochozoans as in-depth studies only 
exist for mollusks and annelids. Here, we analyze peptidergic systems in 
Nemertea, Brachiopoda, and Phoronida. We screened transcriptomes from 13 
nemertean, 6 brachiopod, and 4 phoronid species for proneuropeptides and 
neuropeptide GPCRs. With mass spectrometry from the nemertean Lineus 
longissimus, we validated several predicted peptides and identified novel ones. 
Molecular phylogeny combined with peptide-sequence and gene-structure 
comparisons allowed us to comprehensively map spiralian neuropeptide evolution. 
We found most mollusk and annelid peptidergic systems also in nemerteans, 
brachiopods, and phoronids. We uncovered previously hidden relationships 
including the orthologies of spiralian CCWamides to arthropod agatoxin-like 
peptides and of mollusk APGWamides to RGWamides from annelids, with ortholog 
systems in nemerteans, brachiopods, and phoronids. We found that pleurin 
neuropeptides previously only found in mollusks are also present in nemerteans 
and brachiopods. We also identified cases of gene family duplications and 
losses. These include a protostome-specific expansion of RFamide/Wamide 
signaling, a spiralian expansion of GnRH-related peptides, and duplications of 
vasopressin/oxytocin before the divergence of brachiopods, phoronids, and 
nemerteans. This analysis expands our knowledge of peptidergic signaling in 
spiralians and other protostomes. Our annotated data set of nearly 1,300 
proneuropeptide sequences and 600 GPCRs presents a useful resource for further 
studies of neuropeptide signaling.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab211
PMCID: PMC8557429
PMID: 34272863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


827. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):4057. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab180.

Corrigendum to: Parallel Evolution of Complex Centipede Venoms Revealed by 
Comparative Proteotranscriptomic Analyses.

Jenner RA, von Reumont BM, Campbell LI, Undheim EAB.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2748-2763.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab180
PMCID: PMC8661437
PMID: 34270757


828. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4659-4673. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab213.

An Independent Evolutionary Origin for Insect Deterrent Cucurbitacins in Iberis 
amara.

Dong L(1)(2), Almeida A(1), Pollier J(3)(4), Khakimov B(5), Bassard JE(1), 
Miettinen K(3)(4), Stærk D(6), Mehran R(2), Olsen CE(1), Motawia MS(1), Goossens 
A(3)(4), Bak S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Environmental Science, University of Copenhagen, 
Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(2)Plant Hormone Biology Group, Swammerdam Institute for Life Science, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(4)VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Food Science, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, 
Denmark.
(6)Department of Drug Design and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health and Medical 
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Pieris rapae and Phyllotreta nemorum are Brassicaceae specialists, but do not 
feed on Iberis amara spp. that contain cucurbitacins. The cucurbitacins are 
highly oxygenated triterpenoid, occurring widespread in cucurbitaceous species 
and in a few other plant families. Using de novo assembled transcriptomics from 
I. amara, gene co-expression analysis and comparative genomics, we unraveled the 
evolutionary origin of the insect deterrent cucurbitacins in I. amara. 
Phylogenetic analysis of five oxidosqualene cyclases and heterologous expression 
allowed us to identify the first committed enzyme in cucurbitacin biosynthesis 
in I. amara, cucurbitadienol synthase (IaCPQ). In addition, two species-specific 
cytochrome P450s (CYP708A16 and CYP708A15) were identified that catalyze the 
unique C16 and C22 hydroxylation of the cucurbitadienol backbone, enzymatic 
steps that have not been reported before. Furthermore, the draft genome assembly 
of I. amara showed that the IaCPQ was localized to the same scaffold together 
with CYP708A15 but spanning over 100 kb, this contrasts with the highly 
organized cucurbitacin gene cluster in the cucurbits. These results reveal that 
cucurbitacin biosynthesis has evolved convergently via different biosynthetic 
routes in different families rather than through divergence from an ancestral 
pathway. This study thus provides new insight into the mechanism of recurrent 
evolution and diversification of a plant defensive chemical.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab213
PMCID: PMC8557398
PMID: 34264303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


829. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4532-4545. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab195.

Molecular Evolutionary Dynamics of Energy Limited Microorganisms.

Shoemaker WR(1), Polezhaeva E(1), Givens KB(1), Lennon JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.

Microorganisms have the unique ability to survive extended periods of time in 
environments with extremely low levels of exploitable energy. To determine the 
extent that energy limitation affects microbial evolution, we examined the 
molecular evolutionary dynamics of a phylogenetically diverse set of taxa over 
the course of 1,000 days. We found that periodic exposure to energy limitation 
affected the rate of molecular evolution, the accumulation of genetic diversity, 
and the rate of extinction. We then determined the degree that energy limitation 
affected the spectrum of mutations as well as the direction of evolution at the 
gene level. Our results suggest that the initial depletion of energy altered the 
direction and rate of molecular evolution within each taxon, though after the 
initial depletion the rate and direction did not substantially change. However, 
this consistent pattern became diminished when comparisons were performed across 
phylogenetically distant taxa, suggesting that although the dynamics of 
molecular evolution under energy limitation are highly generalizable across the 
microbial tree of life, the targets of adaptation are specific to a given taxon.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab195
PMCID: PMC8476154
PMID: 34255090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


830. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4116-4134. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab203.

Genomic Signatures Supporting the Symbiosis and Formation of Chitinous Tube in 
the Deep-Sea Tubeworm Paraescarpia echinospica.

Sun Y(1)(2)(3), Sun J(1)(4), Yang Y(1)(3), Lan Y(1)(3), Ip JC(2), Wong WC(1)(3), 
Kwan YH(1)(3), Zhang Y(2), Han Z(5), Qiu JW(2), Qian PY(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ocean Science and Hong Kong Branch of the Southern Marine 
Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), The Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), 
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Institute of Evolution & Marine Biodiversity, Ocean University of China, 
Qingdao, China.
(5)Institute of Deep-Sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Sanya, China.

Vestimentiferan tubeworms are iconic animals that present as large 
habitat-forming chitinized tube bushes in deep-sea chemosynthetic ecosystems. 
They are gutless and depend entirely on their endosymbiotic sulfide-oxidizing 
chemoautotrophic bacteria for nutrition. Information on the genomes of several 
siboglinid endosymbionts has improved our understanding of their nutritional 
supplies. However, the interactions between tubeworms and their endosymbionts 
remain largely unclear due to a paucity of host genomes. Here, we report the 
chromosome-level genome of the vestimentiferan tubeworm Paraescarpia 
echinospica. We found that the genome has been remodeled to facilitate symbiosis 
through the expansion of gene families related to substrate transfer and innate 
immunity, suppression of apoptosis, regulation of lysosomal digestion, and 
protection against oxidative stress. Furthermore, the genome encodes a 
programmed cell death pathway that potentially controls the endosymbiont 
population. Our integrated genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic analyses 
uncovered matrix proteins required for the formation of the chitinous tube and 
revealed gene family expansion and co-option as evolutionary mechanisms driving 
the acquisition of this unique supporting structure for deep-sea tubeworms. 
Overall, our study provides novel insights into the host's support system that 
has enabled tubeworms to establish symbiosis, thrive in deep-sea hot vents and 
cold seeps, and produce the unique chitinous tubes in the deep sea.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab203
PMCID: PMC8476170
PMID: 34255082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


831. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4792-4804. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab206.

Mistranslation Reduces Mutation Load in Evolving Proteins through Negative 
Epistasis with DNA Mutations.

Zheng J(1)(2), Guo N(3), Wagner A(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Quartier Sorge-Batiment Genopode, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Wallisellen, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA.

Translational errors during protein synthesis cause phenotypic mutations that 
are several orders of magnitude more frequent than DNA mutations. Such 
phenotypic mutations may affect adaptive evolution through their interactions 
with DNA mutations. To study how mistranslation may affect the adaptive 
evolution of evolving proteins, we evolved populations of green fluorescent 
protein (GFP) in either high-mistranslation or low-mistranslation Escherichia 
coli hosts. In both hosts, we first evolved GFP under purifying selection for 
the ancestral phenotype green fluorescence, and then under directional selection 
toward the new phenotype yellow fluorescence. High-mistranslation populations 
evolved modestly higher yellow fluorescence during each generation of evolution 
than low-mistranslation populations. We demonstrate by high-throughput 
sequencing that elevated mistranslation reduced the accumulation of deleterious 
DNA mutations under both purifying and directional selection. It did so by 
amplifying the fitness effects of deleterious DNA mutations through negative 
epistasis with phenotypic mutations. In contrast, mistranslation did not affect 
the incidence of beneficial mutations. Our findings show that phenotypic 
mutations interact epistatically with DNA mutations. By reducing a population's 
mutation load, mistranslation can affect an important determinant of 
evolvability.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab206
PMCID: PMC8557407
PMID: 34255074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


832. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5156-5174. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab210.

An Extended Admixture Pulse Model Reveals the Limitations to Human-Neandertal 
Introgression Dating.

Iasi LNM(1), Ringbauer H(2), Peter BM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evloutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.

Neandertal DNA makes up 2-3% of the genomes of all non-African individuals. The 
patterns of Neandertal ancestry in modern humans have been used to estimate that 
this is the result of gene flow that occurred during the expansion of modern 
humans into Eurasia, but the precise dates of this event remain largely unknown. 
Here, we introduce an extended admixture pulse model that allows joint 
estimation of the timing and duration of gene flow. This model leads to simple 
expressions for both the admixture segment distribution and the decay curve of 
ancestry linkage disequilibrium, and we show that these two statistics are 
closely related. In simulations, we find that estimates of the mean time of 
admixture are largely robust to details in gene flow models, but that the 
duration of the gene flow can only be recovered if gene flow is very recent and 
the exact recombination map is known. These results imply that gene flow from 
Neandertals into modern humans could have happened over hundreds of generations. 
Ancient genomes from the time around the admixture event are thus likely 
required to resolve the question when, where, and for how long humans and 
Neandertals interacted.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab210
PMCID: PMC8557420
PMID: 34254144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


833. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4805-4821. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab207.

Highly Replicated Evolution of Parapatric Ecotypes.

James ME(1), Arenas-Castro H(1), Groh JS(1), Allen SL(1), Engelstädter J(1), 
Ortiz-Barrientos D(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Queensland,St. Lucia, QLD, 
Australia.

Parallel evolution of ecotypes occurs when selection independently drives the 
evolution of similar traits across similar environments. The multiple origins of 
ecotypes are often inferred based on a phylogeny that clusters populations 
according to geographic location and not by the environment they occupy. 
However, the use of phylogenies to infer parallel evolution in closely related 
populations is problematic because gene flow and incomplete lineage sorting can 
uncouple the genetic structure at neutral markers from the colonization history 
of populations. Here, we demonstrate multiple origins within ecotypes of an 
Australian wildflower, Senecio lautus. We observed strong genetic structure as 
well as phylogenetic clustering by geography and show that this is unlikely due 
to gene flow between parapatric ecotypes, which was surprisingly low. We further 
confirm this analytically by demonstrating that phylogenetic distortion due to 
gene flow often requires higher levels of migration than those observed in 
S. lautus. Our results imply that selection can repeatedly create similar 
phenotypes despite the perceived homogenizing effects of gene flow.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab207
PMCID: PMC8557401
PMID: 34254128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


834. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4562-4572. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab205.

Local Adaptation of Bitter Taste and Ecological Speciation in a Wild Mammal.

Jiao H(1), Wang Q(1), Wang BJ(1), Li K(2)(3), Lövy M(4), Nevo E(2), Li Q(1), Su 
W(1), Jiang P(5), Zhao H(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Tibetan Centre for Ecology and Conservation at Wuhan 
University-Tibet University, Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Grassland Agro-Ecosystem, Institute of Innovation 
Ecology, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(4)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, České 
Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(5)Monell Chemical Senses Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Research Center for Ecology, College of Science, Tibet University, Lhasa, 
China.

Sensory systems are attractive evolutionary models to address how organisms 
adapt to local environments that can cause ecological speciation. However, tests 
of these evolutionary models have focused on visual, auditory, and olfactory 
senses. Here, we show local adaptation of bitter taste receptor genes in two 
neighboring populations of a wild mammal-the blind mole rat Spalax galili-that 
show ecological speciation in divergent soil environments. We found that 
basalt-type bitter receptors showed higher response intensity and sensitivity 
compared with chalk-type ones using both genetic and cell-based functional 
analyses. Such functional changes could help animals adapted to basalt soil 
select plants with less bitterness from diverse local foods, whereas a weaker 
reception to bitter taste may allow consumption of a greater range of plants for 
animals inhabiting chalk soil with a scarcity of food supply. Our study shows 
divergent selection on food resources through local adaptation of bitter 
receptors, and suggests that taste plays an important yet underappreciated role 
in speciation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab205
PMCID: PMC8476172
PMID: 34240186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


835. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4822-4831. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab208.

Global Genetic Heterogeneity in Adaptive Traits.

Lopez-Arboleda WA(1), Reinert S(1), Nordborg M(2), Korte A(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational and Theoretical Biology, University of Würzburg, 
Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Gregor Mendel Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter, 
Vienna, Austria.

Understanding the genetic architecture of complex traits is a major objective in 
biology. The standard approach for doing so is genome-wide association studies 
(GWAS), which aim to identify genetic polymorphisms responsible for variation in 
traits of interest. In human genetics, consistency across studies is commonly 
used as an indicator of reliability. However, if traits are involved in 
adaptation to the local environment, we do not necessarily expect 
reproducibility. On the contrary, results may depend on where you sample, and 
sampling across a wide range of environments may decrease the power of GWAS 
because of increased genetic heterogeneity. In this study, we examine how 
sampling affects GWAS in the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana. We show 
that traits like flowering time are indeed influenced by distinct genetic 
effects in local populations. Furthermore, using gene expression as a molecular 
phenotype, we show that some genes are globally affected by shared variants, 
whereas others are affected by variants specific to subpopulations. Remarkably, 
the former are essentially all cis-regulated, whereas the latter are 
predominately affected by trans-acting variants. Our result illustrate that 
conclusions about genetic architecture can be extremely sensitive to sampling 
and population structure.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab208
PMCID: PMC8557469
PMID: 34240182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


836. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4832-4846. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab209.

Genome Analysis Traces Regional Dispersal of Rice in Taiwan and Southeast Asia.

Alam O(1), Gutaker RM(1)(2), Wu CC(3)(4), Hicks KA(5), Bocinsky K(6), Castillo 
CC(7), Acabado S(8), Fuller D(7)(9), d'Alpoim Guedes JA(10), Hsing YI(3), 
Purugganan MD(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, New York, NY, 
USA.
(2)Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Plant and Microbial Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Plant Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Biology, Kenyon College, Gambier, OH, USA.
(6)Crow Canyon Archaeological Center, Cortez, CO, USA.
(7)Institute of Archaeology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Anthropology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)School of Cultural Heritage, North-West University, Xi'an, China.
(10)Department of Anthropology and Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 
University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(11)Institute for the Study of the Ancient World, New York University, New York, 
NY, USA.

The dispersal of rice (Oryza sativa) following domestication influenced massive 
social and cultural changes across South, East, and Southeast (SE) Asia. The 
history of dispersal across islands of SE Asia, and the role of Taiwan and the 
Austronesian expansion in this process remain largely unresolved. Here, we 
reconstructed the routes of dispersal of O. sativa ssp. japonica rice to Taiwan 
and the northern Philippines using whole-genome resequencing of indigenous rice 
landraces coupled with archaeological and paleoclimate data. Our results 
indicate that japonica rice found in the northern Philippines diverged from 
Indonesian landraces as early as 3,500 years before present (BP). In contrast, 
rice cultivated by the indigenous peoples of the Taiwanese mountains has complex 
origins. It comprises two distinct populations, each best explained as a result 
of admixture between temperate japonica that presumably came from northeast 
Asia, and tropical japonica from the northern Philippines and mainland SE Asia, 
respectively. We find that the temperate japonica component of these indigenous 
Taiwan populations diverged from northeast Asia subpopulations at about 2,600 
BP, whereas gene flow from the northern Philippines had begun before ∼1,300  BP. 
This coincides with a period of intensified trade established across the South 
China Sea. Finally, we find evidence for positive selection acting on distinct 
genomic regions in different rice subpopulations, indicating local adaptation 
associated with the spread of japonica rice.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab209
PMCID: PMC8557449
PMID: 34240169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


837. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3531-3542. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab186.

Reconciling Asgardarchaeota Phylogenetic Proximity to Eukaryotes and 
Planctomycetes Cellular Features in the Evolution of Life.

Devos DP(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD)-CSIC, Junta de Andalucía, 
Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Seville, Spain.

The relationship between the three domains of life-Archaea, Bacteria, and 
Eukarya-is one of Biology's greatest mysteries. Current favored models imply two 
ancestral domains, Bacteria and Archaea, with eukaryotes originating within 
Archaea. This type of models has been supported by the recent description of the 
Asgardarchaeota, the closest prokaryotic relatives of eukaryotes. However, there 
are many problems associated with any scenarios implying that eukaryotes 
originated from within the Archaea, including genome mosaicism, phylogenies, the 
cellular organization of the Archaea, and their ancestral character. By 
contrast, all models of eukaryogenesis fail to consider two relevant 
discoveries: the detection of membrane coat proteins, and of 
phagocytosis-related processes in Planctomycetes, which are among the bacteria 
with the most developed endomembrane system. Consideration of these often 
overlooked features and others found in Planctomycetes and related bacteria 
suggest an evolutionary model based on a single ancestral domain. In this model, 
the proximity of Asgard and eukaryotes is not rejected but instead, Asgard are 
considered as diverging away from a common ancestor instead of on the way toward 
the eukaryotic ancestor. This model based on a single ancestral domain solves 
most of the ambiguities associated with the ones based on two ancestral domains. 
The single-domain model is better suited to explain the origin and evolution of 
all three domains of life, blurring the distinctions between them. Support for 
this model as well as the opportunities that it presents not only for 
reinterpreting previous results, but also for planning future experiments, are 
explored.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab186
PMCID: PMC8382908
PMID: 34229349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


838. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4778-4791. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab202.

Natural Selection Shapes Maintenance of Orthologous sRNAs in Divergent 
Host-Restricted Bacterial Genomes.

Thairu MW(1)(2), Meduri VRS(1), Degnan PH(3), Hansen AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, University of California, 
Riverside, Riverside, California, USA.

Historically it has been difficult to study the evolution of bacterial small 
RNAs (sRNAs) across distantly related species. For example, identifying homologs 
of sRNAs is often difficult in genomes that have undergone multiple structural 
rearrangements. Also, some types of regulatory sRNAs evolve at rapid rates. The 
high degree of genomic synteny among divergent host-restricted bacterial 
lineages, including intracellular symbionts, is conducive to sRNA maintenance 
and homolog identification. In turn, symbiont genomes can provide us with novel 
insights into sRNA evolution. Here, we examine the sRNA expression profile of 
the obligate symbiont of psyllids, Carsonella ruddii, which has one of the 
smallest cellular genomes described. Using RNA-seq, we identified 36 and 32 
antisense sRNAs (asRNAs) expressed by Carsonella from the psyllids Bactericera 
cockerelli (Carsonella-BC) and Diaphorina citri (Carsonella-DC), respectively. 
The majority of these asRNAs were associated with genes that are involved in 
essential amino acid biosynthetic pathways. Eleven of the asRNAs were conserved 
in both Carsonella lineages and the majority were maintained by selection. 
Notably, five of the corresponding coding sequences are also the targets of 
conserved asRNAs in a distantly related insect symbiont, Buchnera. We detected 
differential expression of two asRNAs for genes involved in arginine and leucine 
biosynthesis occurring between two distinct Carsonella-BC life stages. Using 
asRNAs identified in Carsonella, Buchnera, and Profftella which are all 
endosymbionts, and Escherichia coli, we determined that regions upstream of 
these asRNAs encode unique conserved patterns of AT/GC richness, GC skew, and 
sequence motifs which may be involved in asRNA regulation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab202
PMCID: PMC8557413
PMID: 34213555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


839. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4765-4777. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab201.

Direct Molecular Evidence for an Ancient, Conserved Developmental Toolkit 
Controlling Posttranscriptional Gene Regulation in Land Plants.

Jia H(1), Aadland K(2), Kolaczkowski O(3), Kolaczkowski B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, University of California, 
Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute for Food and 
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

In plants, miRNA production is orchestrated by a suite of proteins that control 
transcription of the pri-miRNA gene, post-transcriptional processing and nuclear 
export of the mature miRNA. Post-transcriptional processing of miRNAs is 
controlled by a pair of physically interacting proteins, hyponastic leaves 1 
(HYL1) and Dicer-like 1 (DCL1). However, the evolutionary history and structural 
basis of the HYL1-DCL1 interaction is unknown. Here we use ancestral sequence 
reconstruction and functional characterization of ancestral HYL1 in vitro and in 
Arabidopsis thaliana to better understand the origin and evolution of the 
HYL1-DCL1 interaction and its impact on miRNA production and plant development. 
We found the ancestral plant HYL1 evolved high affinity for both double-stranded 
RNA (dsRNA) and its DCL1 partner before the divergence of mosses from seed 
plants (∼500 Ma), and these high-affinity interactions remained largely 
conserved throughout plant evolutionary history. Structural modeling and 
molecular binding experiments suggest that the second of two dsRNA-binding 
motifs (DSRMs) in HYL1 may interact tightly with the first of two C-terminal 
DCL1 DSRMs to mediate the HYL1-DCL1 physical interaction necessary for efficient 
miRNA production. Transgenic expression of the nearly 200 Ma-old ancestral 
flowering-plant HYL1 in A. thaliana was sufficient to rescue many key aspects of 
plant development disrupted by HYL1- knockout and restored near-native miRNA 
production, suggesting that the functional partnership of HYL1-DCL1 originated 
very early in and was strongly conserved throughout the evolutionary history of 
terrestrial plants. Overall, our results are consistent with a model in which 
miRNA-based gene regulation evolved as part of a conserved plant "developmental 
toolkit."

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab201
PMCID: PMC8557471
PMID: 34196710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


840. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4715-4731. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab200.

Whole-Genome Duplication Facilitated the Evolution of C4 Photosynthesis in 
Gynandropsis gynandra.

Huang CF(1), Liu WY(1), Lu MJ(1), Chen YH(1), Ku MSB(2), Li WH(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Bioagricultural Science, National Chiayi University, Chiayi, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

In higher plants, whole-genome duplication (WGD) is thought to facilitate the 
evolution of C4 photosynthesis from C3 photosynthesis. To understand this issue, 
we used new and existing leaf-development transcriptomes to construct two coding 
sequence databases for C4Gynandropsis gynandra and C3Tarenaya hassleriana, which 
shared a WGD before their divergence. We compared duplicated genes in the two 
species and found that the WGD contributed to four aspects of the evolution of 
C4 photosynthesis in G. gynandra. First, G. gynandra has retained the duplicates 
of ALAAT (alanine aminotransferase) and GOGAT (glutamine oxoglutarate 
aminotransferase) for nitrogen recycling to establish a photorespiratory CO2 
pump in bundle sheath (BS) cells for increasing photosynthesis efficiency, 
suggesting that G. gynandra experienced a C3-C4 intermediate stage during the C4 
evolution. Second, G. gynandra has retained almost all known 
vein-development-related paralogous genes derived from the WGD event, likely 
contributing to the high vein complexity of G. gynandra. Third, the WGD 
facilitated the evolution of C4 enzyme genes and their recruitment into the C4 
pathway. Fourth, several genes encoding photosystem I proteins were derived from 
the WGD and are upregulated in G. gynandra, likely enabling the NADH 
dehydrogenase-like complex to produce extra ATPs for the C4 CO2 concentration 
mechanism. Thus, the WGD apparently played an enabler role in the evolution of 
C4 photosynthesis in G. gynandra. Importantly, an ALAAT duplicate became highly 
expressed in BS cells in G. gynandra, facilitating nitrogen recycling and 
transition to the C4 cycle. This study revealed how WDG may facilitate C4 
photosynthesis evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab200
PMCID: PMC8557433
PMID: 34191030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


841. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4475-4492. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab188.

Molecular Clocks and Archeogenomics of a Late Period Egyptian Date Palm Leaf 
Reveal Introgression from Wild Relatives and Add Timestamps on the 
Domestication.

Pérez-Escobar OA(1), Bellot S(1), Przelomska NAS(1)(2), Flowers JM(3), Nesbitt 
M(1), Ryan P(1), Gutaker RM(1), Gros-Balthazard M(4), Wells T(5), Kuhnhäuser 
BG(5), Schley R(1), Bogarín D(6), Dodsworth S(1)(7), Diaz R(1), Lehmann M(8), 
Petoe P(9), Eiserhardt WL(1)(9), Preick M(10), Hofreiter M(10), Hajdas I(11), 
Purugganan M(3), Antonelli A(1)(5)(12), Gravendeel B(13), Leitch IJ(1), Jimenez 
MFT(12), Papadopulos AST(14), Chomicki G(15), Renner SS(16), Baker WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, London, United Kingdom.
(2)National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, 
USA.
(3)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu 
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(4)French National Research Institute for Sustainable Development, Montpellier, 
BP, France.
(5)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Lankester Botanical Garden, University of Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica.
(7)School of Biological Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, United 
Kingdom.
(8)British Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Biology, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(10)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam, 
Germany.
(11)Department of Earth Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(12)Gothenburg Global Biodiversity Centre and Department of Biological and 
Environmental Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(13)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(14)Molecular Ecology and Fisheries Genetics Laboratory, School of Biological 
Sciences, University of Bangor, Bangor, United Kingdom.
(15)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Western 
Bank, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(16)Department of Biology, Washington University, Saint Louis, MO, USA.

The date palm, Phoenix dactylifera, has been a cornerstone of Middle Eastern and 
North African agriculture for millennia. It was first domesticated in the 
Persian Gulf, and its evolution appears to have been influenced by gene flow 
from two wild relatives, P. theophrasti, currently restricted to Crete and 
Turkey, and P. sylvestris, widespread from Bangladesh to the West Himalayas. 
Genomes of ancient date palm seeds show that gene flow from P. theophrasti to P. 
dactylifera may have occurred by ∼2,200 years ago, but traces of P. sylvestris 
could not be detected. We here integrate archeogenomics of a ∼2,100-year-old P. 
dactylifera leaf from Saqqara (Egypt), molecular-clock dating, and coalescence 
approaches with population genomic tests, to probe the hybridization between the 
date palm and its two closest relatives and provide minimum and maximum 
timestamps for its reticulated evolution. The Saqqara date palm shares a close 
genetic affinity with North African date palm populations, and we find clear 
genomic admixture from both P. theophrasti, and P. sylvestris, indicating that 
both had contributed to the date palm genome by 2,100 years ago. 
Molecular-clocks placed the divergence of P. theophrasti from P. dactylifera/P. 
sylvestris and that of P. dactylifera from P. sylvestris in the Upper Miocene, 
but strongly supported, conflicting topologies point to older gene flow between 
P. theophrasti and P. dactylifera, and P. sylvestris and P. dactylifera. Our 
work highlights the ancient hybrid origin of the date palms, and prompts the 
investigation of the functional significance of genetic material introgressed 
from both close relatives, which in turn could prove useful for modern date palm 
breeding.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab188
PMCID: PMC8476131
PMID: 34191029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


842. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3512-3530. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab198.

Monitoring Insect Transposable Elements in Large Double-Stranded DNA Viruses 
Reveals Host-to-Virus and Virus-to-Virus Transposition.

Loiseau V(1), Peccoud J(2), Bouzar C(1), Guillier S(1), Fan J(3), Gueli Alletti 
G(3), Meignin C(4), Herniou EA(5), Federici BA(6), Wennmann JT(3), Jehle JA(3), 
Cordaux R(2), Gilbert C(1).

Author information:
(1)CNRS, IRD, UMR Évolution, Génomes, Comportement et Écologie, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Laboratoire Ecologie et Biologie des Interactions, Equipe Ecologie Evolution 
Symbiose, Université de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(3)Julius Kühn Institute (JKI), Institute for Biological Control, Darmstadt, 
Germany.
(4)Modèles Insectes d'Immunité Antivirale (M3i), Université de Strasbourg, IBMC 
CNRS-UPR9022, Strasbourg, France.
(5)Institut de Recherche sur la Biologie de l'Insecte, UMR7261 CNRS-Université 
de Tours, Tours, France.
(6)Department of Entomology, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA, 
USA.

The mechanisms by which transposable elements (TEs) can be horizontally 
transferred between animals are unknown, but viruses are possible candidate 
vectors. Here, we surveyed the presence of host-derived TEs in viral genomes in 
35 deep sequencing data sets produced from 11 host-virus systems, encompassing 
nine arthropod host species (five lepidopterans, two dipterans, and two 
crustaceans) and six different double-stranded (ds) DNA viruses (four 
baculoviruses and two iridoviruses). We found evidence of viral-borne TEs in 14 
data sets, with frequencies of viral genomes carrying a TE ranging from 0.01% to 
26.33% for baculoviruses and from 0.45% to 7.36% for iridoviruses. The analysis 
of viral populations separated by a single replication cycle revealed that 
viral-borne TEs originating from an initial host species can be retrieved after 
viral replication in another host species, sometimes at higher frequencies. 
Furthermore, we detected a strong increase in the number of integrations in a 
viral population for a TE absent from the hosts' genomes, indicating that this 
TE has undergone intense transposition within the viral population. Finally, we 
provide evidence that many TEs found integrated in viral genomes (15/41) have 
been horizontally transferred in insects. Altogether, our results indicate that 
multiple large dsDNA viruses have the capacity to shuttle TEs in insects and 
they underline the potential of viruses to act as vectors of horizontal transfer 
of TEs. Furthermore, the finding that TEs can transpose between viral genomes of 
a viral species sets viruses as possible new niches in which TEs can persist and 
evolve.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab198
PMCID: PMC8383894
PMID: 34191026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


843. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4573-4587. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab160.

Inferring Long-Term Effective Population Size with Mutation-Selection Models.

Latrille T(1)(2), Lanore V(1), Lartillot N(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive UMR 5558, Université de Lyon, 
Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Villeurbanne, France.
(2)École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, 
Lyon, France.

Mutation-selection phylogenetic codon models are grounded on population genetics 
first principles and represent a principled approach for investigating the 
intricate interplay between mutation, selection, and drift. In their current 
form, mutation-selection codon models are entirely characterized by the 
collection of site-specific amino-acid fitness profiles. However, thus far, they 
have relied on the assumption of a constant genetic drift, translating into a 
unique effective population size (Ne) across the phylogeny, clearly an 
unrealistic assumption. This assumption can be alleviated by introducing 
variation in Ne between lineages. In addition to Ne, the mutation rate (μ) is 
susceptible to vary between lineages, and both should covary with life-history 
traits (LHTs). This suggests that the model should more globally account for the 
joint evolutionary process followed by all of these lineage-specific variables 
(Ne, μ, and LHTs). In this direction, we introduce an extended 
mutation-selection model jointly reconstructing in a Bayesian Monte Carlo 
framework the fitness landscape across sites and long-term trends in Ne, μ, and 
LHTs along the phylogeny, from an alignment of DNA coding sequences and a matrix 
of observed LHTs in extant species. The model was tested against simulated data 
and applied to empirical data in mammals, isopods, and primates. The 
reconstructed history of Ne in these groups appears to correlate with LHTs or 
ecological variables in a way that suggests that the reconstruction is 
reasonable, at least in its global trends. On the other hand, the range of 
variation in Ne inferred across species is surprisingly narrow. This last point 
suggests that some of the assumptions of the model, in particular concerning the 
assumed absence of epistatic interactions between sites, are potentially 
problematic.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab160
PMCID: PMC8476147
PMID: 34191010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


844. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4546-4561. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab197.

Functional Characterization of the Cnidarian Antiviral Immune Response Reveals 
Ancestral Complexity.

Lewandowska M(1), Sharoni T(1), Admoni Y(1), Aharoni R(1), Moran Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, Alexander Silberman Institute 
of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.

Animals evolved a broad repertoire of innate immune sensors and downstream 
effector cascades for defense against RNA viruses. Yet, this system varies 
greatly among different bilaterian animals, masking its ancestral state. In this 
study, we aimed to characterize the antiviral immune response of the cnidarian 
Nematostella vectensis and decipher the function of the retinoic acid-inducible 
gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs) known to detect viral double-stranded RNA 
(dsRNA) in bilaterians but activate different antiviral pathways in vertebrates 
and nematodes. We show that polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)), a mimic 
of long viral dsRNA and a primary ligand for the vertebrate RLR melanoma 
differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5), triggers a complex antiviral immune 
response bearing features distinctive for both vertebrate and invertebrate 
systems. Importantly, a well-characterized agonist of the vertebrate RIG-I 
receptor does not induce a significant transcriptomic response that bears 
signature of the antiviral immune response, which experimentally supports the 
results of a phylogenetic analysis indicating clustering of the two N. vectensis 
RLR paralogs (NveRLRa and NveRLRb) with MDA5. Furthermore, the results of 
affinity assays reveal that NveRLRb binds poly(I:C) and long dsRNA and its 
knockdown impairs the expression of putative downstream effector genes including 
RNA interference components. Our study provides for the first time the 
functional evidence for the conserved role of RLRs in initiating immune response 
to dsRNA that originated before the cnidarian-bilaterian split and lay a strong 
foundation for future research on the evolution of the immune responses to RNA 
viruses.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab197
PMCID: PMC8476169
PMID: 34180999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


845. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4095-4115. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab196.

Adaptive Resistance Mutations at Suprainhibitory Concentrations Independent of 
SOS Mutagenesis.

Gutiérrez R(1)(2), Ram Y(3)(4), Berman J(5), de Sousa KCM(1), Nachum-Biala Y(1), 
Britzi M(6), Elad D(7), Glaser G(8), Covo S(9), Harrus S(1).

Author information:
(1)The Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Agriculture, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel.
(2)The Center for Research in Tropical Diseases, Faculty of Microbiology, 
University of Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica.
(3)School of Zoology, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 
Israel.
(4)School of Computer Science, Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, Herzliya, 
Israel.
(5)Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Ramat Aviv, Israel.
(6)The National Residue Control Laboratory, The Kimron Veterinary Institute, Bet 
Dagan, Israel.
(7)Department of Clinical Bacteriology and Mycology, The Kimron Veterinary 
Institute, Bet Dagan, Israel.
(8)Department of Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, Institute for 
Medical Research Israel-Canada, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(9)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture, The 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel.

Emergence of resistant bacteria during antimicrobial treatment is one of the 
most critical and universal health threats. It is known that several 
stress-induced mutagenesis and heteroresistance mechanisms can enhance microbial 
adaptation to antibiotics. Here, we demonstrate that the pathogen Bartonella can 
undergo stress-induced mutagenesis despite the fact it lacks error-prone 
polymerases, the rpoS gene and functional UV-induced mutagenesis. We demonstrate 
that Bartonella acquire de novo single mutations during rifampicin exposure at 
suprainhibitory concentrations at a much higher rate than expected from 
spontaneous fluctuations. This is while exhibiting a minimal heteroresistance 
capacity. The emerged resistant mutants acquired a single rpoB mutation, whereas 
no other mutations were found in their whole genome. Interestingly, the 
emergence of resistance in Bartonella occurred only during gradual exposure to 
the antibiotic, indicating that Bartonella sense and react to the changing 
environment. Using a mathematical model, we demonstrated that, to reproduce the 
experimental results, mutation rates should be transiently increased over 
1,000-folds, and a larger population size or greater heteroresistance capacity 
is required. RNA expression analysis suggests that the increased mutation rate 
is due to downregulation of key DNA repair genes (mutS, mutY, and recA), 
associated with DNA breaks caused by massive prophage inductions. These results 
provide new evidence of the hazard of antibiotic overuse in medicine and 
agriculture.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab196
PMCID: PMC8476149
PMID: 34175952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


846. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4505-4519. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab191.

Identification of a Novel Class of Photolyases as Possible Ancestors of Their 
Family.

Xu L(1)(2), Chen S(1), Wen B(2), Shi H(1), Chi C(3), Liu C(1), Wang K(1), Tao 
X(1), Wang M(1), Lv J(1), Yan L(1), Ling L(1), Zhu G(2).

Author information:
(1)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Active Biological Macro-molecules, Wannan 
Medical College, Wuhu, Anhui, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Biomedicine in Gene Diseases and Health of Anhui Higher 
Education Institutes, Anhui Normal University, Wuhu, Anhui, China.
(3)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale and School 
of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, 
China.

UV irradiation induces the formation of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and 
6-4 photoproducts in DNA. These two types of lesions can be directly 
photorepaired by CPD photolyases and 6-4 photolyases, respectively. Recently, a 
new class of 6-4 photolyases named iron-sulfur bacterial cryptochromes and 
photolyases (FeS-BCPs) were found, which were considered as the ancestors of all 
photolyases and their homologs-cryptochromes. However, a controversy exists 
regarding 6-4 photoproducts only constituting ∼10-30% of the total UV-induced 
lesions that primordial organisms would hardly survive without a CPD repair 
enzyme. By extensive phylogenetic analyses, we identified a novel class of 
proteins, all from eubacteria. They have relatively high similarity to class 
I/III CPD photolyases, especially in the putative substrate-binding and 
FAD-binding regions. However, these proteins are shorter, and they lack the 
"N-terminal α/β domain" of normal photolyases. Therefore, we named them short 
photolyase-like. Nevertheless, similar to FeS-BCPs, some of short 
photolyase-likes also contain four conserved cysteines, which may also 
coordinate an iron-sulfur cluster as FeS-BCPs. A member from Rhodococcus 
fascians was cloned and expressed. It was demonstrated that the protein contains 
a FAD cofactor and an iron-sulfur cluster, and has CPD repair activity. It was 
speculated that this novel class of photolyases may be the real ancestors of the 
cryptochrome/photolyase family.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab191
PMCID: PMC8476157
PMID: 34175934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


847. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4700-4714. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab189.

An Analysis of Methylome Evolution in Primates.

Sahm A(1), Koch P(2), Horvath S(3), Hoffmann S(1).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Group, Leibniz Institute on Aging-Fritz Lipmann 
Institute, Jena, Germany.
(2)Core Facility Life Science Computing, Leibniz Institute on Aging-Fritz 
Lipmann Institute, Jena, Germany.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Although the investigation of the epigenome becomes increasingly important, 
still little is known about the long-term evolution of epigenetic marks and 
systematic investigation strategies are still lacking. Here, we systematically 
demonstrate the transfer of classic phylogenetic methods such as maximum 
likelihood based on substitution models, parsimony, and distance-based to 
interval-scaled epigenetic data. Using a great apes blood data set, we 
demonstrate that DNA methylation is evolutionarily conserved at the level of 
individual CpGs in promotors, enhancers, and genic regions. Our analysis also 
reveals that this epigenomic conservation is significantly correlated with its 
transcription factor binding density. Binding sites for transcription factors 
involved in neuron differentiation and components of AP-1 evolve at a 
significantly higher rate at methylation than at the nucleotide level. Moreover, 
our models suggest an accelerated epigenomic evolution at binding sites of 
BRCA1, chromobox homolog protein 2, and factors of the polycomb repressor 2 
complex in humans. For most genomic regions, the methylation-based 
reconstruction of phylogenetic trees is at par with sequence-based 
reconstruction. Most strikingly, phylogenetic reconstruction using methylation 
rates in enhancer regions was ineffective independently of the chosen model. We 
identify a set of phylogenetically uninformative CpG sites enriched in enhancers 
controlling immune-related genes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab189
PMCID: PMC8557466
PMID: 34175932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


848. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4732-4747. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab192.

Plastic Rewiring of Sef1 Transcriptional Networks and the Potential of 
Nonfunctional Transcription Factor Binding in Facilitating Adaptive Evolution.

Hsu PC(1), Lu TC(2)(3), Hung PH(1)(4), Jhou YT(1), Amine AAA(1)(5), Liao CW(1), 
Leu JY(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(2)Research Center for Healthy Aging and Institute of New Drug Development, 
China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(4)Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University and 
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.
(5)Molecular and Cell Biology Program, Taiwan International Graduate Program, 
Academia Sinica and Graduate Institute of Life Science, National Defense Medical 
Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Prior and extensive plastic rewiring of a transcriptional network, followed by a 
functional switch of the conserved transcriptional regulator, can shape the 
evolution of a new network with diverged functions. The presence of three 
distinct iron regulatory systems in fungi that use orthologous transcriptional 
regulators suggests that these systems evolved in that manner. Orthologs of the 
transcriptional activator Sef1 are believed to be central to how iron regulatory 
systems developed in fungi, involving gene gain, plastic network rewiring, and 
switches in regulatory function. We show that, in the protoploid yeast Lachancea 
kluyveri, plastic rewiring of the L. kluyveri Sef1 (Lk-Sef1) network, together 
with a functional switch, enabled Lk-Sef1 to regulate TCA cycle genes, unlike 
Candida albicans Sef1 that mainly regulates iron-uptake genes. Moreover, we 
observed pervasive nonfunctional binding of Sef1 to its target genes. Enhancing 
Lk-Sef1 activity resuscitated the corresponding transcriptional network, 
providing immediate adaptive benefits in changing environments. Our study not 
only sheds light on the evolution of Sef1-centered transcriptional networks but 
also shows the adaptive potential of nonfunctional transcription factor binding 
for evolving phenotypic novelty and diversity.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab192
PMCID: PMC8557406
PMID: 34175931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


849. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4520-4531. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab193.

Dissecting the Fitness Costs of Complex Mutations.

Yubero P(1), Poyatos JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Logic of Genomic Systems Laboratory, CNB-CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

The fitness cost of complex pleiotropic mutations is generally difficult to 
assess. On the one hand, it is necessary to identify which molecular properties 
are directly altered by the mutation. On the other, this alteration modifies the 
activity of many genetic targets with uncertain consequences. Here, we examine 
the possibility of addressing these challenges by identifying unique predictors 
of these costs. To this aim, we consider mutations in the RNA polymerase (RNAP) 
in Escherichia coli as a model of complex mutations. Changes in RNAP modify the 
global program of transcriptional regulation, with many consequences. Among 
others is the difficulty to decouple the direct effect of the mutation from the 
response of the whole system to such mutation. A problem that we solve 
quantitatively with data of a set of constitutive genes, those on which the 
global program acts most directly. We provide a statistical framework that 
incorporates the direct effects and other molecular variables linked to this 
program as predictors, which leads to the identification that some genes are 
more suitable to determine costs than others. Therefore, we not only identified 
which molecular properties best anticipate fitness, but we also present the 
paradoxical result that, despite pleiotropy, specific genes serve as more solid 
predictors. These results have connotations for the understanding of the 
architecture of robustness in biological systems.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab193
PMCID: PMC8476139
PMID: 34175930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


850. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4493-4504. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab190.

The Antibiotic Efflux Protein TolC Is a Highly Evolvable Target under Colicin E1 
or TLS Phage Selection.

Tamer YT(1), Gaszek I(1), Rodrigues M(1), Coskun FS(2), Farid M(3), Koh 
AY(4)(5), Russ W(1)(6), Toprak E(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Green Center for Systems Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(6)Center for Alzheimer's and Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(7)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.

Bacteriophages and bacterial toxins are promising antibacterial agents to treat 
infections caused by multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria. In fact, bacteriophages 
have recently been successfully used to treat life-threatening infections caused 
by MDR bacteria (Schooley RT, Biswas B, Gill JJ, Hernandez-Morales A, Lancaster 
J, Lessor L, Barr JJ, Reed SL, Rohwer F, Benler S, et al. 2017. Development and 
use of personalized bacteriophage-based therapeutic cocktails to treat a patient 
with a disseminated resistant Acinetobacter baumannii infection. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother. 61(10); Chan BK, Turner PE, Kim S, Mojibian HR, Elefteriades 
JA, Narayan D. 2018. Phage treatment of an aortic graft infected with 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Evol Med Public Health. 2018(1):60-66; Petrovic Fabijan 
A, Lin RCY, Ho J, Maddocks S, Ben Zakour NL, Iredell JR, Westmead Bacteriophage 
Therapy Team. 2020. Safety of bacteriophage therapy in severe Staphylococcus 
aureus infection. Nat Microbiol. 5(3):465-472). One potential problem with using 
these antibacterial agents is the evolution of resistance against them in the 
long term. Here, we studied the fitness landscape of the Escherichia coli TolC 
protein, an outer membrane efflux protein that is exploited by a pore forming 
toxin called colicin E1 and by TLS phage (Pagie L, Hogeweg P. 1999. Colicin 
diversity: a result of eco-evolutionary dynamics. J Theor Biol. 196(2):251-261; 
Andersen C, Hughes C, Koronakis V. 2000. Chunnel vision. Export and efflux 
through bacterial channel-tunnels. EMBO Rep. 1(4):313-318; Koronakis V, Andersen 
C, Hughes C. 2001. Channel-tunnels. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 11(4):403-407; Czaran 
TL, Hoekstra RF, Pagie L. 2002. Chemical warfare between microbes promotes 
biodiversity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 99(2):786-790; Cascales E, Buchanan SK, 
Duché D, Kleanthous C, Lloubès R, Postle K, Riley M, Slatin S, Cavard D. 2007. 
Colicin biology. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 71(1):158-229). By systematically 
assessing the distribution of fitness effects of ∼9,000 single amino acid 
replacements in TolC using either positive (antibiotics and bile salts) or 
negative (colicin E1 and TLS phage) selection pressures, we quantified 
evolvability of the TolC. We demonstrated that the TolC is highly optimized for 
the efflux of antibiotics and bile salts. In contrast, under colicin E1 and TLS 
phage selection, TolC sequence is very sensitive to mutations. Finally, we have 
identified a large set of mutations in TolC that increase resistance of E. coli 
against colicin E1 or TLS phage without changing antibiotic susceptibility of 
bacterial cells. Our findings suggest that TolC is a highly evolvable target 
under negative selection which may limit the potential clinical use of 
bacteriophages and bacterial toxins if evolutionary aspects are not taken into 
account.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab190
PMCID: PMC8476145
PMID: 34175926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


851. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4222-4237. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab150.

Selection on Phalanx Development in the Evolution of the Bird Wing.

de Bakker MAG(1), van der Vos W(1)(2), de Jager K(1), Chung WY(1), Fowler DA(1), 
Dondorp E(3), Spiekman SNF(4), Chew KY(1), Xie B(1), Jiménez R(5), Bickelmann 
C(2), Kuratani S(6)(7), Blazek R(8), Kondrashov P(9), Renfree MB(10), Richardson 
MK(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Science & Health, Institute of Biology Leiden (IBL), Leiden 
University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Museum für Naturkunde, Leibniz-Institut für Evolutions- und 
Biodiversitätsforschung, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Paläontologisches Institut und Museum, Universität Zürich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(5)Departamento de Genética, Universidad de Granada, Lab 127 Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica, Granada, Spain.
(6)Laboratory for Evolutionary Morphology, RIKEN Center for Biosystems Dynamics 
Research, Kobe, Japan.
(7)RIKEN Cluster for Pioneering Research, Kobe, Japan.
(8)Institute of Vertebrate Biology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(9)Kirksville College of Osteopathic Medicine, A. T. Still University of Health 
Sciences, Kirksville, MO, USA.
(10)School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.

The frameshift hypothesis is a widely accepted model of bird wing evolution. 
This hypothesis postulates a shift in positional values, or 
molecular-developmental identity, that caused a change in digit phenotype. The 
hypothesis synthesized developmental and paleontological data on wing digit 
homology. The "most anterior digit" (MAD) hypothesis presents an alternative 
view based on changes in transcriptional regulation in the limb. The molecular 
evidence for both hypotheses is that the MAD expresses Hoxd13 but not Hoxd11 and 
Hoxd12. This digit I "signature" is thought to characterize all amniotes. Here, 
we studied Hoxd expression patterns in a phylogenetic sample of 18 amniotes. 
Instead of a conserved molecular signature in digit I, we find wide variation of 
Hoxd11, Hoxd12, and Hoxd13 expression in digit I. Patterns of apoptosis, and 
Sox9 expression, a marker of the phalanx-forming region, suggest that phalanges 
were lost from wing digit IV because of early arrest of the phalanx-forming 
region followed by cell death. Finally, we show that multiple amniote lineages 
lost phalanges with no frameshift. Our findings suggest that the bird wing 
evolved by targeted loss of phalanges under selection. Consistent with our view, 
some recent phylogenies based on dinosaur fossils eliminate the need to 
postulate a frameshift in the first place. We suggest that the phenotype of the 
Archaeopteryx lithographica wing is also consistent with phalanx loss. More 
broadly, our results support a gradualist model of evolution based on tinkering 
with developmental gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab150
PMCID: PMC8476175
PMID: 34164688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


852. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4419-4434. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab183.

The Evolutionary History of Wild, Domesticated, and Feral Brassica oleracea 
(Brassicaceae).

Mabry ME(1), Turner-Hissong SD(2), Gallagher EY(1), McAlvay AC(3), An H(1), 
Edger PP(4), Moore JD(5), Pink DAC(6), Teakle GR(7), Stevens CJ(8)(9), Barker 
G(7), Labate J(10), Fuller DQ(9)(11)(12), Allaby RG(7), Beissinger T(13), Decker 
JE(14), Gore MA(15), Pires JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and Bond Life Sciences Center, University of 
Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
(2)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California Davis, Davis, 
CA, USA.
(3)Institute of Economic Botany, The New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Horticulture, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(5)Systems Biology Centre, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(6)Agriculture and Environment Department, Harper Adams University, Newport, 
United Kingdom.
(7)School of Life Science, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(8)School of Archaeology and Museology, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(9)Institute of Archaeology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(10)USDA, ARS Plant Genetic Resources Unit, Cornell AgriTech, Geneva, NY, USA.
(11)School of Cultural Heritage, Northwest University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(12)Department of Archaeology, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human 
History, Jena, Germany.
(13)Division of Plant Breeding Methodology, Department of Crop Sciences, 
University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.
(14)Division of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
(15)Plant Breeding and Genetics Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, 
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

Understanding the evolutionary history of crops, including identifying wild 
relatives, helps to provide insight for conservation and crop breeding efforts. 
Cultivated Brassica oleracea has intrigued researchers for centuries due to its 
wide diversity in forms, which include cabbage, broccoli, cauliflower, kale, 
kohlrabi, and Brussels sprouts. Yet, the evolutionary history of this species 
remains understudied. With such different vegetables produced from a single 
species, B. oleracea is a model organism for understanding the power of 
artificial selection. Persistent challenges in the study of B. oleracea include 
conflicting hypotheses regarding domestication and the identity of the closest 
living wild relative. Using newly generated RNA-seq data for a diversity panel 
of 224 accessions, which represents 14 different B. oleracea crop types and nine 
potential wild progenitor species, we integrate phylogenetic and population 
genetic techniques with ecological niche modeling, archaeological, and literary 
evidence to examine relationships among cultivars and wild relatives to clarify 
the origin of this horticulturally important species. Our analyses point to the 
Aegean endemic B. cretica as the closest living relative of cultivated B. 
oleracea, supporting an origin of cultivation in the Eastern Mediterranean 
region. Additionally, we identify several feral lineages, suggesting that 
cultivated plants of this species can revert to a wild-like state with relative 
ease. By expanding our understanding of the evolutionary history in B. oleracea, 
these results contribute to a growing body of knowledge on crop domestication 
that will facilitate continued breeding efforts including adaptation to changing 
environmental conditions.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab183
PMCID: PMC8476135
PMID: 34157722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


853. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4388-4402. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab177.

Museomics Dissects the Genetic Basis for Adaptive Seasonal Coloration in the 
Least Weasel.

Miranda I(1)(2), Giska I(1), Farelo L(1), Pimenta J(1), Zimova M(3), Bryk J(4), 
Dalén L(5)(6), Mills LS(7)(8), Zub K(9), Melo-Ferreira J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CIBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, InBIO 
Laboratório Associado, Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal.
(2)Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(3)School for Environment and Sustainability, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(4)School of Applied Sciences, University of Huddersfield, Quennsgate, 
Huddersfield, United Kingdom.
(5)Centre for Palaeogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics and Genetics, Swedish Museum of Natural History, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Wildlife Biology Program, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(8)Office of Research and Creative Scholarship, University of Montana, Missoula, 
MT, USA.
(9)Mammal Research Institute, Polish Academy of Sciences, Białowieża, Poland.

Dissecting the link between genetic variation and adaptive phenotypes provides 
outstanding opportunities to understand fundamental evolutionary processes. 
Here, we use a museomics approach to investigate the genetic basis and evolution 
of winter coat coloration morphs in least weasels (Mustela nivalis), a repeated 
adaptation for camouflage in mammals with seasonal pelage color moults across 
regions with varying winter snow. Whole-genome sequence data were obtained from 
biological collections and mapped onto a newly assembled reference genome for 
the species. Sampling represented two replicate transition zones between nivalis 
and vulgaris coloration morphs in Europe, which typically develop white or brown 
winter coats, respectively. Population analyses showed that the morph 
distribution across transition zones is not a by-product of historical 
structure. Association scans linked a 200-kb genomic region to coloration morph, 
which was validated by genotyping museum specimens from intermorph experimental 
crosses. Genotyping the wild populations narrowed down the association to 
pigmentation gene MC1R and pinpointed a candidate amino acid change 
cosegregating with coloration morph. This polymorphism replaces an ancestral 
leucine residue by lysine at the start of the first extracellular loop of the 
protein in the vulgaris morph. A selective sweep signature overlapped the 
association region in vulgaris, suggesting that past adaptation favored 
winter-brown morphs and can anchor future adaptive responses to decreasing 
winter snow. Using biological collections as valuable resources to study natural 
adaptations, our study showed a new evolutionary route generating winter color 
variation in mammals and that seasonal camouflage can be modulated by changes at 
single key genes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab177
PMCID: PMC8476133
PMID: 34157721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


854. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4463-4474. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab187.

Genetic Admixture in the Culturally Unique Peranakan Chinese Population in 
Southeast Asia.

Wu D(1), Li PY(2)(3), Pan B(2)(3)(4), Tiang Z(2)(3)(4), Dou J(4), Williantarra 
I(5)(6), Pribowo AY(6), Nurdiansyah R(7); SG Peranakan Project; Foo 
RSY(2)(3)(4), Wang C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Ministry of Education Key 
Laboratory of Environment and Health and State Key Laboratory of Environmental 
Health (Incubating), School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)NUHS Cardiovascular Diseases Translational Research Program, National 
University Health System, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 
(A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Medical Imaging, School of Medical Science, Faculty 
of Medical and Health Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Indonesia International Institute for Life 
Sciences (i3L), Jakarta, Indonesia.
(7)Department of Bioinformatics, Indonesia International Institute for Life 
Sciences (i3L), Jakarta, Indonesia.

The Peranakan Chinese are culturally unique descendants of immigrants from China 
who settled in the Malay Archipelago ∼300-500 years ago. Today, among large 
communities in Southeast Asia, the Peranakans have preserved Chinese traditions 
with strong influence from the local indigenous Malays. Yet, whether or to what 
extent genetic admixture co-occurred with the cultural mixture has been a topic 
of ongoing debate. We performed whole-genome sequencing (WGS) on 177 Singapore 
(SG) Peranakans and analyzed the data jointly with WGS data of Asian and 
European populations. We estimated that Peranakan Chinese inherited ∼5.62% (95% 
confidence interval [CI]: 4.76-6.49%) Malay ancestry, much higher than that in 
SG Chinese (1.08%, 0.65-1.51%), southern Chinese (0.86%, 0.50-1.23%), and 
northern Chinese (0.25%, 0.18-0.32%). A sex-biased admixture history, in which 
the Malay ancestry was contributed primarily by females, was supported by X 
chromosomal variants, and mitochondrial (MT) and Y haplogroups. Finally, we 
identified an ancient admixture event shared by Peranakan Chinese and SG Chinese 
∼1,612 (95% CI: 1,345-1,923) years ago, coinciding with the settlement history 
of Han Chinese in southern China, apart from the recent admixture event with 
Malays unique to Peranakan Chinese ∼190 (159-213) years ago. These findings 
greatly advance our understanding of the dispersal history of Chinese and their 
interaction with indigenous populations in Southeast Asia.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab187
PMCID: PMC8476152
PMID: 34152401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


855. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3495. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab137.

Corrigendum to: Eighteen Coral Genomes Reveal the Evolutionary Origin of 
Acropora Strategies to Accommodate Environmental Changes.

Shinzato C, Khalturin K, Inoue J, Zayasu Y, Kanda M, Kawamitsu M, Yoshioka Y, 
Yamashita H, Suzuki G, Satoh N.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):16-30.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab137
PMCID: PMC8661417
PMID: 34151991


856. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3832-3846. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab023.

Expansion and Accelerated Evolution of 9-Exon Odorant Receptors in Polistes 
Paper Wasps.

Legan AW(1), Jernigan CM(1), Miller SE(1), Fuchs MF(1), Sheehan MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Animal Social Evolution and Recognition, Department of 
Neurobiology and Behavior, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Independent origins of sociality in bees and ants are associated with 
independent expansions of particular odorant receptor (OR) gene subfamilies. In 
ants, one clade within the OR gene family, the 9-exon subfamily, has 
dramatically expanded. These receptors detect cuticular hydrocarbons (CHCs), key 
social signaling molecules in insects. It is unclear to what extent 9-exon OR 
subfamily expansion is associated with the independent evolution of sociality 
across Hymenoptera, warranting studies of taxa with independently derived social 
behavior. Here, we describe OR gene family evolution in the northern paper wasp, 
Polistes fuscatus, and compare it to four additional paper wasp species spanning 
∼40 million years of evolutionary divergence. We find 200 putatively functional 
OR genes in P. fuscatus, matching predictions from neuroanatomy, and more than 
half of these are in the 9-exon subfamily. Most OR gene expansions are tandemly 
arrayed at orthologous loci in Polistes genomes, and microsynteny analysis shows 
species-specific gain and loss of 9-exon ORs within tandem arrays. There is 
evidence of episodic positive diversifying selection shaping ORs in expanded 
subfamilies. Values of omega (dN/dS) are higher among 9-exon ORs compared to 
other OR subfamilies. Within the Polistes OR gene tree, branches in the 9-exon 
OR clade experience relaxed negative (relaxed purifying) selection relative to 
other branches in the tree. Patterns of OR evolution within Polistes are 
consistent with 9-exon OR function in CHC perception by combinatorial coding, 
with both natural selection and neutral drift contributing to interspecies 
differences in gene copy number and sequence.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab023
PMCID: PMC8383895
PMID: 34151983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


857. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4449-4462. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab185.

Chromosome Fusion Affects Genetic Diversity and Evolutionary Turnover of 
Functional Loci but Consistently Depends on Chromosome Size.

Cicconardi F(1)(2), Lewis JJ(3)(4), Martin SH(5), Reed RD(4), Danko CG(3), 
Montgomery SH(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol Bristol-Life Sciences 
Building, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Baker Institute for Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(4)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(5)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.

Major changes in chromosome number and structure are linked to a series of 
evolutionary phenomena, including intrinsic barriers to gene flow or suppression 
of recombination due to chromosomal rearrangements. However, chromosome 
rearrangements can also affect the fundamental dynamics of molecular evolution 
within populations by changing relationships between linked loci and altering 
rates of recombination. Here, we build chromosome-level assembly Eueides 
isabella and, together with a recent chromosome-level assembly of Dryas iulia, 
examine the evolutionary consequences of multiple chromosome fusions in 
Heliconius butterflies. These assemblies pinpoint fusion points on 10 of the 20 
autosomal chromosomes and reveal striking differences in the characteristics of 
fused and unfused chromosomes. The ten smallest autosomes in D. iulia and E. 
isabella, which have each fused to a longer chromosome in Heliconius, have 
higher repeat and GC content, and longer introns than predicted by their 
chromosome length. When fused, these characteristics change to become more in 
line with chromosome length. The fusions also led to reduced diversity, which 
likely reflects increased background selection and selection against 
introgression between diverging populations, following a reduction in per-base 
recombination rate. We further show that chromosome size and fusion impact 
turnover rates of functional loci at a macroevolutionary scale. Together these 
results provide further evidence that chromosome fusion in Heliconius likely had 
dramatic effects on population level processes shaping rates of neutral and 
adaptive divergence. These effects may have impacted patterns of diversification 
in Heliconius, a classic example of an adaptive radiation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab185
PMCID: PMC8476138
PMID: 34146107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


858. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4435-4448. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab184.

Tunicates Illuminate the Enigmatic Evolution of Chordate Metallothioneins by 
Gene Gains and Losses, Independent Modular Expansions, and Functional 
Convergences.

Calatayud S(1), Garcia-Risco M(2), Palacios Ò(2), Capdevila M(2), Cañestro C(1), 
Albalat R(1).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística and Institut de Recerca 
de la Biodiversitat (IRBio), Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Departament de Química, Facultat de Ciències, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.

To investigate novel patterns and processes of protein evolution, we have 
focused in the metallothioneins (MTs), a singular group of metal-binding, 
cysteine-rich proteins that, due to their high degree of sequence diversity, 
still represents a "black hole" in Evolutionary Biology. We have identified and 
analyzed more than 160 new MTs in nonvertebrate chordates (especially in 37 
species of ascidians, 4 thaliaceans, and 3 appendicularians) showing that 
prototypic tunicate MTs are mono-modular proteins with a pervasive preference 
for cadmium ions, whereas vertebrate and cephalochordate MTs are bimodular 
proteins with diverse metal preferences. These structural and functional 
differences imply a complex evolutionary history of chordate MTs-including de 
novo emergence of genes and domains, processes of convergent evolution, events 
of gene gains and losses, and recurrent amplifications of functional 
domains-that would stand for an unprecedented case in the field of protein 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab184
PMCID: PMC8476144
PMID: 34146103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


859. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5345-5358. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab178.

Schistosome W-Linked Genes Inform Temporal Dynamics of Sex Chromosome Evolution 
and Suggest Candidate for Sex Determination.

Elkrewi M(1), Moldovan MA(1)(2), Picard MAL(1)(3), Vicoso B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Science and Technology Austria, Klosterneuburg, Austria.
(2)Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia.
(3)CNRS, Biologie Intégrative des Organismes Marins (BIOM), Observatoire 
Océanologique, Sorbonne Université, Banyuls-sur-Mer, France.

Schistosomes, the human parasites responsible for snail fever, are 
female-heterogametic. Different parts of their ZW sex chromosomes have stopped 
recombining in distinct lineages, creating "evolutionary strata" of various 
ages. Although the Z-chromosome is well characterized at the genomic and 
molecular level, the W-chromosome has remained largely unstudied from an 
evolutionary perspective, as only a few W-linked genes have been detected 
outside of the model species Schistosoma mansoni. Here, we characterize the gene 
content and evolution of the W-chromosomes of S. mansoni and of the divergent 
species S. japonicum. We use a combined RNA/DNA k-mer based pipeline to assemble 
around 100 candidate W-specific transcripts in each of the species. About half 
of them map to known protein coding genes, the majority homologous to S. mansoni 
Z-linked genes. We perform an extended analysis of the evolutionary strata 
present in the two species (including characterizing a previously undetected 
young stratum in S. japonicum) to infer patterns of sequence and expression 
evolution of W-linked genes at different time points after recombination was 
lost. W-linked genes show evidence of degeneration, including high rates of 
protein evolution and reduced expression. Most are found in young 
lineage-specific strata, with only a few high expression ancestral W-genes 
remaining, consistent with the progressive erosion of nonrecombining regions. 
Among these, the splicing factor u2af2 stands out as a promising candidate for 
primary sex determination, opening new avenues for understanding the molecular 
basis of the reproductive biology of this group. Keywords: sex chromosomes, 
evolutionary strata, W-linked gene, sex determining gene, schistosome parasites.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab178
PMCID: PMC8662593
PMID: 34146097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


860. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):4748-4764. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab181.

DLX5/6 GABAergic Expression Affects Social Vocalization: Implications for Human 
Evolution.

Levi G(1), de Lombares C(1), Giuliani C(2), Iannuzzi V(3), Aouci R(1), Garagnani 
P(4)(5), Franceschi C(4)(6), Grimaud-Hervé D(7), Narboux-Nême N(1).

Author information:
(1)Physiologie Moléculaire et Adaptation, CNRS UMR7221, Département AVIV, Muséum 
National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Anthropology & Centre for Genome Biology, Department 
of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of Bologna, 
Italy.
(3)Alma Mater Research Institute on Global Challenges and Climate Change, 
University of Bologna, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), 
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(5)Clinical Chemistry, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet 
at Huddinge University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Institute of Information Technologies, Mathematics and Mechanics, Lobachevsky 
University, Nizhniy Novgorod, Russia.
(7)Histoire Naturelle de l'Homme Préhistorique, CNRS UMR 7194, Département H&E, 
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

DLX5 and DLX6 are two closely related transcription factors involved in brain 
development and in GABAergic differentiation. The DLX5/6 locus is regulated by 
FoxP2, a gene involved in language evolution and has been associated with 
neurodevelopmental disorders and mental retardation. Targeted inactivation of 
Dlx5/6 in mouse GABAergic neurons (Dlx5/6VgatCre mice) results in behavioral and 
metabolic phenotypes notably increasing lifespan by 33%. Here, we show that 
Dlx5/6VgatCre mice present a hyper-vocalization and hyper-socialization 
phenotype. While only 7% of control mice emitted more than 700 
vocalizations/10 min, 30% and 56% of heterozygous or homozygous Dlx5/6VgatCre 
mice emitted more than 700 and up to 1,400 calls/10 min with a higher proportion 
of complex and modulated calls. Hyper-vocalizing animals were more sociable: the 
time spent in dynamic interactions with an unknown visitor was more than doubled 
compared to low-vocalizing individuals. The characters affected by Dlx5/6 in the 
mouse (sociability, vocalization, skull, and brain shape…) overlap those 
affected in the "domestication syndrome". We therefore explored the possibility 
that DLX5/6 played a role in human evolution and "self-domestication" comparing 
DLX5/6 genomic regions from Neanderthal and modern humans. We identified an 
introgressed Neanderthal haplotype (DLX5/6-N-Haplotype) present in 12.6% of 
European individuals that covers DLX5/6 coding and regulatory sequences. The 
DLX5/6-N-Haplotype includes the binding site for GTF2I, a gene associated with 
Williams-Beuren syndrome, a hyper-sociability and hyper-vocalization 
neurodevelopmental disorder. The DLX5/6-N-Haplotype is significantly 
underrepresented in semi-supercentenarians (>105 years of age), a 
well-established human model of healthy aging and longevity, suggesting their 
involvement in the coevolution of longevity, sociability, and speech.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab181
PMCID: PMC8557472
PMID: 34132815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


861. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4362-4375. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab173.

Fluctuating Environments Maintain Genetic Diversity through Neutral Fitness 
Effects and Balancing Selection.

Abdul-Rahman F(1)(2), Tranchina D(1)(3), Gresham D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, New York, NY, 
USA.
(3)Courant Math Institute, New York University, New York, NY, USA.

Genetic variation is the raw material upon which selection acts. The majority of 
environmental conditions change over time and therefore may result in variable 
selective effects. How temporally fluctuating environments impact the 
distribution of fitness effects and in turn population diversity is an 
unresolved question in evolutionary biology. Here, we employed continuous 
culturing using chemostats to establish environments that switch periodically 
between different nutrient limitations and compared the dynamics of selection to 
static conditions. We used the pooled Saccharomyces cerevisiae haploid gene 
deletion collection as a synthetic model for populations comprising thousands of 
unique genotypes. Using barcode sequencing, we find that static environments are 
uniquely characterized by a small number of high-fitness genotypes that rapidly 
dominate the population leading to dramatic decreases in genetic diversity. By 
contrast, fluctuating environments are enriched in genotypes with neutral 
fitness effects and an absence of extreme fitness genotypes contributing to the 
maintenance of genetic diversity. We also identified a unique class of genotypes 
whose frequencies oscillate sinusoidally with a period matching the 
environmental fluctuation. Oscillatory behavior corresponds to large differences 
in short-term fitness that are not observed across long timescales pointing to 
the importance of balancing selection in maintaining genetic diversity in 
fluctuating environments. Our results are consistent with a high degree of 
environmental specificity in the distribution of fitness effects and the 
combined effects of reduced and balancing selection in maintaining genetic 
diversity in the presence of variable selection.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab173
PMCID: PMC8476146
PMID: 34132791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


862. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3497-3511. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab174.

Inferring Population Histories for Ancient Genomes Using Genome-Wide 
Genealogies.

Speidel L(1)(2), Cassidy L(3), Davies RW(4), Hellenthal G(2), Skoglund P(1), 
Myers SR(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Genetics Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Republic of 
Ireland.
(4)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.

Ancient genomes anchor genealogies in directly observed historical genetic 
variation and contextualize ancestral lineages with archaeological insights into 
their geography and cultural associations. However, the majority of ancient 
genomes are of lower coverage and cannot be directly built into genealogies. 
Here, we present a fast and scalable method, Colate, the first approach for 
inferring ancestral relationships through time between low-coverage genomes 
without requiring phasing or imputation. Our approach leverages sharing patterns 
of mutations dated using a genealogy to infer coalescence rates. For deeply 
sequenced ancient genomes, we additionally introduce an extension of the Relate 
algorithm for joint inference of genealogies incorporating such genomes. 
Application to 278 present-day and 430 ancient DNA samples of >0.5x mean 
coverage allows us to identify dynamic population structure and directional gene 
flow between early farmer and European hunter-gatherer groups. We further show 
that the previously reported, but still unexplained, increase in the TCC/TTC 
mutation rate, which is strongest in West Eurasia today, was already present at 
similar strength and widespread in the Late Glacial Period ~10k-15k years ago, 
but is not observed in samples >30k years old. It is strongest in Neolithic 
farmers, and highly correlated with recent coalescence rates between other 
genomes and a 10,000-year-old Anatolian hunter-gatherer. This suggests gene-flow 
among ancient peoples postdating the last glacial maximum as widespread and 
localizes the driver of this mutational signal in both time and geography in 
that region. Our approach should be widely applicable in future for addressing 
other evolutionary questions, and in other species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab174
PMCID: PMC8383901
PMID: 34129037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


863. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4077-4094. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab182.

Gene Conversion Facilitates the Adaptive Evolution of Self-Resistance in Highly 
Toxic Newts.

Gendreau KL(1), Hornsby AD(1)(2), Hague MTJ(3), McGlothlin JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VI, USA.
(2)Philip L. Wright Zoological Museum, Division of Biological Sciences, 
University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(3)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.

Reconstructing the histories of complex adaptations and identifying the 
evolutionary mechanisms underlying their origins are two of the primary goals of 
evolutionary biology. Taricha newts, which contain high concentrations of the 
deadly toxin tetrodotoxin (TTX) as an antipredator defense, have evolved 
resistance to self-intoxication, which is a complex adaptation requiring changes 
in six paralogs of the voltage-gated sodium channel (Nav) gene family, the 
physiological target of TTX. Here, we reconstruct the origins of TTX 
self-resistance by sequencing the entire Nav gene family in newts and related 
salamanders. We show that moderate TTX resistance evolved early in the 
salamander lineage in three of the six Nav paralogs, preceding the proposed 
appearance of tetrodotoxic newts by ∼100 My. TTX-bearing newts possess 
additional unique substitutions across the entire Nav gene family that provide 
physiological TTX resistance. These substitutions coincide with signatures of 
positive selection and relaxed purifying selection, as well as gene conversion 
events, that together likely facilitated their evolution. We also identify a 
novel exon duplication within Nav1.4 encoding an expressed TTX-binding site. Two 
resistance-conferring changes within newts appear to have spread via nonallelic 
gene conversion: in one case, one codon was copied between paralogs, and in the 
second, multiple substitutions were homogenized between the duplicate exons of 
Nav1.4. Our results demonstrate that gene conversion can accelerate the 
coordinated evolution of gene families in response to a common selection 
pressure.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab182
PMCID: PMC8476164
PMID: 34129031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


864. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4634-4646. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab175.

Geonomics: Forward-Time, Spatially Explicit, and Arbitrarily Complex Landscape 
Genomic Simulations.

Terasaki Hart DE(1), Bishop AP(1), Wang IJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, College of 
Natural Resources, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 14;:

Understanding the drivers of spatial patterns of genomic diversity has emerged 
as a major goal of evolutionary genetics. The flexibility of forward-time 
simulation makes it especially valuable for these efforts, allowing for the 
simulation of arbitrarily complex scenarios in a way that mimics how real 
populations evolve. Here, we present Geonomics, a Python package for performing 
complex, spatially explicit, landscape genomic simulations with full spatial 
pedigrees that dramatically reduces user workload yet remains customizable and 
extensible because it is embedded within a popular, general-purpose language. We 
show that Geonomics results are consistent with expectations for a variety of 
validation tests based on classic models in population genetics and then 
demonstrate its utility and flexibility with a trio of more complex simulation 
scenarios that feature polygenic selection, selection on multiple traits, 
simulation on complex landscapes, and nonstationary environmental change. We 
then discuss runtime, which is primarily sensitive to landscape raster size, 
memory usage, which is primarily sensitive to maximum population size and 
recombination rate, and other caveats related to the model's methods for 
approximating recombination and movement. Taken together, our tests and 
demonstrations show that Geonomics provides an efficient and robust platform for 
population genomic simulations that capture complex spatial and evolutionary 
dynamics.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab175
PMCID: PMC8476160
PMID: 34117771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


865. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4403-4418. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab179.

Heterogeneous Histories of Recombination Suppression on Stickleback Sex 
Chromosomes.

Sardell JM(1), Josephson MP(2), Dalziel AC(3), Peichel CL(2), Kirkpatrick M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 
USA.
(2)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Biology, Saint Mary's University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

How consistent are the evolutionary trajectories of sex chromosomes shortly 
after they form? Insights into the evolution of recombination, differentiation, 
and degeneration can be provided by comparing closely related species with 
homologous sex chromosomes. The sex chromosomes of the threespine stickleback 
(Gasterosteus aculeatus) and its sister species, the Japan Sea stickleback (G. 
nipponicus), have been well characterized. Little is known, however, about the 
sex chromosomes of their congener, the blackspotted stickleback (G. wheatlandi). 
We used pedigrees to obtain experimentally phased whole genome sequences from 
blackspotted stickleback X and Y chromosomes. Using multispecies gene trees and 
analysis of shared duplications, we demonstrate that Chromosome 19 is the 
ancestral sex chromosome and that its oldest stratum evolved in the common 
ancestor of the genus. After the blackspotted lineage diverged, its sex 
chromosomes experienced independent and more extensive recombination 
suppression, greater X-Y differentiation, and a much higher rate of Y 
degeneration than the other two species. These patterns may result from a 
smaller effective population size in the blackspotted stickleback. A recent 
fusion between the ancestral blackspotted stickleback Y chromosome and 
Chromosome 12, which produced a neo-X and neo-Y, may have been favored by the 
very small size of the recombining region on the ancestral sex chromosome. We 
identify six strata on the ancestral and neo-sex chromosomes where recombination 
between the X and Y ceased at different times. These results confirm that sex 
chromosomes can evolve large differences within and between species over short 
evolutionary timescales.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab179
PMCID: PMC8476171
PMID: 34117766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


866. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4334-4345. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab171.

Species-Wide Transposable Element Repertoires Retrace the Evolutionary History 
of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Host.

Bleykasten-Grosshans C(1), Fabrizio R(1), Friedrich A(1), Schacherer J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, GMGM UMR 7156, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris, France.

Transposable elements (TE) are an important source of genetic variation with a 
dynamic and content that greatly differ in a wide range of species. The origin 
of the intraspecific content variation is not always clear and little is known 
about the precise nature of it. Here, we surveyed the species-wide content of 
the Ty LTR-retrotransposons in a broad collection of 1,011 Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae natural isolates to understand what can stand behind the variation of 
the repertoire that is the type and number of Ty elements. We have compiled an 
exhaustive catalog of all the TE sequence variants present in the S. cerevisiae 
species by identifying a large set of new sequence variants. The 
characterization of the TE content in each isolate clearly highlighted that each 
subpopulation exhibits a unique and specific repertoire, retracing the 
evolutionary history of the species. Most interestingly, we have shown that 
ancient interspecific hybridization events had a major impact in the birth of 
new sequence variants and therefore in the shaping of the TE repertoires. We 
also investigated the transpositional activity of these elements in a large set 
of natural isolates, and we found a broad variability related to the level of 
ploidy as well as the genetic background. Overall, our results pointed out that 
the evolution of the Ty content is deeply impacted by clade-specific events such 
as introgressions and therefore follows the population structure. In addition, 
our study lays the foundation for future investigations to better understand the 
transpositional regulation and more broadly the TE-host interactions.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab171
PMCID: PMC8476168
PMID: 34115140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


867. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4346-4361. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab172.

Evolutionary and Ecological Drivers Shape the Emergence and Extinction of 
Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus Lineages.

Di Nardo A(1), Ferretti L(2), Wadsworth J(1), Mioulet V(1), Gelman B(3), 
Karniely S(3), Scherbakov A(4), Ziay G(5), Özyörük F(6), Parlak Ü(7), 
Tuncer-Göktuna P(7), Hassanzadeh R(8), Khalaj M(8), Dastoor SM(8), Abdollahi 
D(8), Khan EU(9), Afzal M(10), Hussain M(10), Knowles NJ(1), King DP(1).

Author information:
(1)The Pirbright Institute, Ash Road, Pirbright, Woking, Surrey, United Kingdom.
(2)Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery, 
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Virology, Kimron Veterinary Institute, Beit Dagan, Israel.
(4)Federal Governmental Budgetary Institution "Federal Centre for Animal Health" 
(FGBI "ARRIAH"), Yur'evets, Vladimir, Russia.
(5)Central Veterinary Diagnostic and Research Laboratory, Kabul, Afghanistan.
(6)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Harran University, Sanliurfa, Turkey.
(7)Foot and Mouth Disease (ŞAP) Institute, Ankara, Turkey.
(8)Iran Veterinary Organization, Ministry of Jihad-e-Agriculture, Tehran, Iran.
(9)Livestock and Dairy Development Department, Government of Punjab, Rawalpindi, 
Pakistan.
(10)Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Pakistan Office, 
Islamabad Pakistan.

Livestock farming across the world is constantly threatened by the evolutionary 
turnover of foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) strains in endemic systems, the 
underlying dynamics of which remain to be elucidated. Here, we map the 
eco-evolutionary landscape of cocirculating FMDV lineages within an important 
endemic virus pool encompassing Western, Central, and parts of Southern Asia, 
reconstructing the evolutionary history and spatial dynamics over the last 
20 years that shape the current epidemiological situation. We demonstrate that 
new FMDV variants periodically emerge from Southern Asia, precipitating waves of 
virus incursions that systematically travel in a westerly direction. We evidence 
how metapopulation dynamics drive the emergence and extinction of spatially 
structured virus populations, and how transmission in different host species 
regulates the evolutionary space of virus serotypes. Our work provides the first 
integrative framework that defines coevolutionary signatures of FMDV in regional 
contexts to help understand the complex interplay between virus phenotypes, host 
characteristics, and key epidemiological determinants of transmission that drive 
FMDV evolution in endemic settings.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab172
PMCID: PMC8476141
PMID: 34115138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


868. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4376-4387. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab176.

Unique Pathogen Peptidomes Facilitate Pathogen-Specific Selection and 
Specialization of MHC Alleles.

Özer O(1)(2), Lenz TL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Group for Evolutionary Immunogenomics, Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(2)Research Unit for Evolutionary Immunogenomics, Department of Biology, 
Universität Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.

A key component of pathogen-specific adaptive immunity in vertebrates is the 
presentation of pathogen-derived antigenic peptides by major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) molecules. The excessive polymorphism observed at MHC genes is 
widely presumed to result from the need to recognize diverse pathogens, a 
process called pathogen-driven balancing selection. This process assumes that 
pathogens differ in their peptidomes-the pool of short peptides derived from the 
pathogen's proteome-so that different pathogens select for different MHC 
variants with distinct peptide-binding properties. Here, we tested this 
assumption in a comprehensive data set of 51.9 Mio peptides, derived from the 
peptidomes of 36 representative human pathogens. Strikingly, we found that 39.7% 
of the 630 pairwise comparisons among pathogens yielded not a single shared 
peptide and only 1.8% of pathogen pairs shared more than 1% of their peptides. 
Indeed, 98.8% of all peptides were unique to a single pathogen species. Using 
computational binding prediction to characterize the binding specificities of 
321 common human MHC class-I variants, we investigated quantitative differences 
among MHC variants with regard to binding peptides from distinct pathogens. Our 
analysis showed signatures of specialization toward specific pathogens 
especially by MHC variants with narrow peptide-binding repertoires. This 
supports the hypothesis that such fastidious MHC variants might be maintained in 
the population because they provide an advantage against particular pathogens. 
Overall, our results establish a key selection factor for the excessive allelic 
diversity at MHC genes observed in natural populations and illuminate the 
evolution of variable peptide-binding repertoires among MHC variants.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab176
PMCID: PMC8476153
PMID: 34110412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


869. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4616-4627. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab168.

Finding Hybrid Incompatibilities Using Genome Sequences from Hybrid Populations.

Blanckaert A(1), Payseur BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

Natural hybrid zones offer a powerful framework for understanding the genetic 
basis of speciation in progress because ongoing hybridization continually 
creates unfavorable gene combinations. Evidence indicates that postzygotic 
reproductive isolation is often caused by epistatic interactions between 
mutations in different genes that evolved independently of one another (hybrid 
incompatibilities). We examined the potential to detect epistatic selection 
against incompatibilities from genome sequence data using the site frequency 
spectrum (SFS) of polymorphisms by conducting individual-based simulations in 
SLiM. We found that the genome-wide SFS in hybrid populations assumes a 
diagnostic shape, with the continual input of fixed differences between source 
populations via migration inducing a mass at intermediate allele frequency. 
Epistatic selection locally distorts the SFS as non-incompatibility alleles rise 
in frequency in a manner analogous to a selective sweep. Building on these 
results, we present a statistical method to identify genomic regions containing 
incompatibility loci that locates departures in the local SFS compared with the 
genome-wide SFS. Cross-validation studies demonstrate that our method detects 
recessive and codominant incompatibilities across a range of scenarios varying 
in the strength of epistatic selection, migration rate, and hybrid zone age. Our 
approach takes advantage of whole genome sequence data, does not require 
knowledge of demographic history, and can be applied to any pair of nascent 
species that forms a hybrid zone.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab168
PMCID: PMC8476132
PMID: 34097068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


870. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4310-4321. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab169.

Patterns and Causes of Signed Linkage Disequilibria in Flies and Plants.

Sandler G(1), Wright SI(1)(2), Agrawal AF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Center for Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

Most empirical studies of linkage disequilibrium (LD) study its magnitude, 
ignoring its sign. Here, we examine patterns of signed LD in two population 
genomic data sets, one from Capsella grandiflora and one from Drosophila 
melanogaster. We consider how processes such as drift, admixture, Hill-Robertson 
interference, and epistasis may contribute to these patterns. We report that 
most types of mutations exhibit positive LD, particularly, if they are predicted 
to be less deleterious. We show with simulations that this pattern arises easily 
in a model of admixture or distance-biased mating, and that genome-wide 
differences across site types are generally expected due to differences in the 
strength of purifying selection even in the absence of epistasis. We further 
explore how signed LD decays on a finer scale, showing that loss of function 
mutations exhibit particularly positive LD across short distances, a pattern 
consistent with intragenic antagonistic epistasis. Controlling for genomic 
distance, signed LD in C. grandiflora decays faster within genes, compared with 
between genes, likely a by-product of frequent recombination in gene promoters 
known to occur in plant genomes. Finally, we use information from published 
biological networks to explore whether there is evidence for negative 
synergistic epistasis between interacting radical missense mutations. In D. 
melanogaster networks, we find a modest but significant enrichment of negative 
LD, consistent with the possibility of intranetwork negative synergistic 
epistasis.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab169
PMCID: PMC8476167
PMID: 34097067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


871. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):4039-4042. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab166.

ggtreeExtra: Compact Visualization of Richly Annotated Phylogenetic Data.

Xu S(1), Dai Z(1), Guo P(1), Fu X(1), Liu S(1), Zhou L(1), Tang W(1), Feng T(1), 
Chen M(1), Zhan L(1), Wu T(1), Hu E(1), Jiang Y(2), Bo X(3), Yu G(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Proteomics, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Microbiome Medicine Center, Zhujiang 
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

We present the ggtreeExtra package for visualizing heterogeneous data with a 
phylogenetic tree in a circular or rectangular layout 
(https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/ggtreeExtra). The package supports more 
data types and visualization methods than other tools. It supports using the 
grammar of graphics syntax to present data on a tree with richly annotated 
layers and allows evolutionary statistics inferred by commonly used software to 
be integrated and visualized with external data. GgtreeExtra is a universal tool 
for tree data visualization. It extends the applications of the phylogenetic 
tree in different disciplines by making more domain-specific data to be 
available to visualize and interpret in the evolutionary context.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab166
PMCID: PMC8382893
PMID: 34097064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


872. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4322-4333. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab170.

Rooting the Animal Tree of Life.

Li Y(1)(2), Shen XX(2)(3), Evans B(4), Dunn CW(1), Rokas A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Rice Biology and Ministry of Agriculture Key Lab of 
Molecular Biology of Crop Pathogens and Insects, Institute of Insect Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Yale Center for Research Computing, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Identifying our most distant animal relatives has emerged as one of the most 
challenging problems in phylogenetics. This debate has major implications for 
our understanding of the origin of multicellular animals and of the earliest 
events in animal evolution, including the origin of the nervous system. Some 
analyses identify sponges as our most distant animal relatives (Porifera-sister 
hypothesis), and others identify comb jellies (Ctenophora-sister hypothesis). 
These analyses vary in many respects, making it difficult to interpret previous 
tests of these hypotheses. To gain insight into why different studies yield 
different results, an important next step in the ongoing debate, we 
systematically test these hypotheses by synthesizing 15 previous phylogenomic 
studies and performing new standardized analyses under consistent conditions 
with additional models. We find that Ctenophora-sister is recovered across the 
full range of examined conditions, and Porifera-sister is recovered in some 
analyses under narrow conditions when most outgroups are excluded and 
site-heterogeneous CAT models are used. We additionally find that the number of 
categories in site-heterogeneous models is sufficient to explain the 
Porifera-sister results. Furthermore, our cross-validation analyses show CAT 
models that recover Porifera-sister have hundreds of additional categories and 
fail to fit significantly better than site-heterogenuous models with far fewer 
categories. Systematic and standardized testing of diverse phylogenetic models 
suggests that we should be skeptical of Porifera-sister results both because 
they are recovered under such narrow conditions and because the models in these 
conditions fit the data no better than other models that recover 
Ctenophora-sister.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab170
PMCID: PMC8476155
PMID: 34097041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


873. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4628-4633. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab165.

AniProtDB: A Collection of Consistently Generated Metazoan Proteomes for 
Comparative Genomics Studies.

Barreira SN(1), Nguyen AD(1), Fredriksen MT(1), Wolfsberg TG(1), Moreland RT(1), 
Baxevanis AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Computational and Statistical Genomics Branch, Division of Intramural 
Research, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

To address the void in the availability of high-quality proteomic data 
traversing the animal tree, we have implemented a pipeline for generating de 
novo assemblies based on publicly available data from the NCBI Sequence Read 
Archive, yielding a comprehensive collection of proteomes from 100 species 
spanning 21 animal phyla. We have also created the Animal Proteome Database 
(AniProtDB), a resource providing open access to this collection of high-quality 
metazoan proteomes, along with information on predicted proteins and protein 
domains for each taxonomic classification and the ability to perform sequence 
similarity searches against all proteomes generated using this pipeline. This 
solution vastly increases the utility of these data by removing the barrier to 
access for research groups who do not have the expertise or resources to 
generate these data themselves and enables the use of data from nontraditional 
research organisms that have the potential to address key questions in 
biomedicine.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 2021.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab165
PMCID: PMC8476134
PMID: 34048573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


874. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3494. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab126.

Erratum to: Genomic Insights into the Origin and Evolution of Molluscan 
Red-Bloodedness in the Blood Clam Tegillarca granosa.

Bao Y, Zeng Q, Wang J, Zhang Z, Zhang Y, Wang S, Wong NK, Yuan W, Huang Y, Zhang 
W, Liu J, Lv L, Xue Q, Zha S, Peng Z, Yao H, Bao Z, Wang S, Lin Z.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2351-2365.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab126
PMCID: PMC8321516
PMID: 34046673


875. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4301-4309. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab164.

On the Origin of Frameshift-Robustness of the Standard Genetic Code.

Xu H(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.

The standard genetic code (SGC) has been extensively analyzed for the biological 
ramifications of its nonrandom structure. For instance, mismatch errors due to 
point mutation or mistranslation have an overall smaller effect on the amino 
acid polar requirement under the SGC than under random genetic codes (RGCs). A 
similar observation was recently made for frameshift errors, prompting the 
assertion that the SGC has been shaped by natural selection for 
frameshift-robustness-conservation of certain amino acid properties upon a 
frameshift mutation or translational frameshift. However, frameshift-robustness 
confers no benefit because frameshifts usually create premature stop codons that 
cause nonsense-mediated mRNA decay or production of nonfunctional truncated 
proteins. We here propose that the frameshift-robustness of the SGC is a 
byproduct of its mismatch-robustness. Of 564 amino acid properties considered, 
the SGC exhibits mismatch-robustness in 93-133 properties and 
frameshift-robustness in 55 properties, respectively, and that the latter is 
largely a subset of the former. For each of the 564 real and 564 randomly 
constructed fake properties of amino acids, there is a positive correlation 
between mismatch-robustness and frameshift-robustness across one million RGCs; 
this correlation arises because most amino acid changes resulting from a 
frameshift are also achievable by a mismatch error. Importantly, the SGC does 
not show significantly higher frameshift-robustness in any of the 55 properties 
than RGCs of comparable mismatch-robustness. These findings support that the 
frameshift-robustness of the SGC need not originate through direct selection and 
can instead be a site effect of its mismatch-robustness.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab164
PMCID: PMC8476161
PMID: 34043802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


876. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4603-4615. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab163.

Robustness of Phylogenetic Inference to Model Misspecification Caused by 
Pairwise Epistasis.

Magee AF(1)(2), Hilton SK(2)(3), DeWitt WS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Computational Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Likelihood-based phylogenetic inference posits a probabilistic model of 
character state change along branches of a phylogenetic tree. These models 
typically assume statistical independence of sites in the sequence alignment. 
This is a restrictive assumption that facilitates computational tractability, 
but ignores how epistasis, the effect of genetic background on mutational 
effects, influences the evolution of functional sequences. We consider the 
effect of using a misspecified site-independent model on the accuracy of 
Bayesian phylogenetic inference in the setting of pairwise-site epistasis. 
Previous work has shown that as alignment length increases, tree reconstruction 
accuracy also increases. Here, we present a simulation study demonstrating that 
accuracy increases with alignment size even if the additional sites are 
epistatically coupled. We introduce an alignment-based test statistic that is a 
diagnostic for pairwise epistasis and can be used in posterior predictive 
checks.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab163
PMCID: PMC8476159
PMID: 34043795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


877. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4588-4602. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab162.

Inferring Genome-Wide Correlations of Mutation Fitness Effects between 
Populations.

Huang X(1), Fortier AL(2), Coffman AJ(3), Struck TJ(1), Irby MN(1), James JE(1), 
León-Burguete JE(4), Ragsdale AP(5), Gutenkunst RN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Center for Genomic Sciences, National Autonomous University of Mexico, MR, 
Mexico.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The effect of a mutation on fitness may differ between populations depending on 
environmental and genetic context, but little is known about the factors that 
underlie such differences. To quantify genome-wide correlations in mutation 
fitness effects, we developed a novel concept called a joint distribution of 
fitness effects (DFE) between populations. We then proposed a new statistic w to 
measure the DFE correlation between populations. Using simulation, we showed 
that inferring the DFE correlation from the joint allele frequency spectrum is 
statistically precise and robust. Using population genomic data, we inferred DFE 
correlations of populations in humans, Drosophila melanogaster, and wild 
tomatoes. In these species, we found that the overall correlation of the joint 
DFE was inversely related to genetic differentiation. In humans and D. 
melanogaster, deleterious mutations had a lower DFE correlation than tolerated 
mutations, indicating a complex joint DFE. Altogether, the DFE correlation can 
be reliably inferred, and it offers extensive insight into the genetics of 
population divergence.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab162
PMCID: PMC8476148
PMID: 34043790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


878. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4286-4300. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab161.

Broad Concordance in the Spatial Distribution of Adaptive and Neutral Genetic 
Variation across an Elevational Gradient in Deer Mice.

Schweizer RM(1), Jones MR(1)(2), Bradburd GS(3), Storz JF(4), Senner NR(1)(5), 
Wolf C(1), Cheviron ZA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(2)Southwest Biological Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, Flagstaff, AZ, 
USA.
(3)Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior Program, Department of Integrative Biology, 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, 
SC, USA.

When species are continuously distributed across environmental gradients, the 
relative strength of selection and gene flow shape spatial patterns of genetic 
variation, potentially leading to variable levels of differentiation across 
loci. Determining whether adaptive genetic variation tends to be structured 
differently than neutral variation along environmental gradients is an open and 
important question in evolutionary genetics. We performed exome-wide population 
genomic analysis on deer mice sampled along an elevational gradient of nearly 
4,000 m of vertical relief. Using a combination of selection scans, 
genotype-environment associations, and geographic cline analyses, we found that 
a large proportion of the exome has experienced a history of altitude-related 
selection. Elevational clines for nearly 30% of these putatively adaptive loci 
were shifted significantly up- or downslope of clines for loci that did not bear 
similar signatures of selection. Many of these selection targets can be 
plausibly linked to known phenotypic differences between highland and lowland 
deer mice, although the vast majority of these candidates have not been reported 
in other studies of highland taxa. Together, these results suggest new 
hypotheses about the genetic basis of physiological adaptation to high altitude, 
and the spatial distribution of adaptive genetic variation along environmental 
gradients.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab161
PMCID: PMC8476156
PMID: 34037784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


879. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3775-3788. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab154.

Adaptive Proteome Diversification by Nonsynonymous A-to-I RNA Editing in Coleoid 
Cephalopods.

Shoshan Y(1), Liscovitch-Brauer N(1), Rosenthal JJC(2), Eisenberg E(1).

Author information:
(1)Raymond and Beverly Sackler School of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)The Eugene Bell Center, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA.

RNA editing by the ADAR enzymes converts selected adenosines into inosines, 
biological mimics for guanosines. By doing so, it alters protein-coding 
sequences, resulting in novel protein products that diversify the proteome 
beyond its genomic blueprint. Recoding is exceptionally abundant in the neural 
tissues of coleoid cephalopods (octopuses, squids, and cuttlefishes), with an 
over-representation of nonsynonymous edits suggesting positive selection. 
However, the extent to which proteome diversification by recoding provides an 
adaptive advantage is not known. It was recently suggested that the role of 
evolutionarily conserved edits is to compensate for harmful genomic 
substitutions, and that there is no added value in having an editable codon as 
compared with a restoration of the preferred genomic allele. Here, we show that 
this hypothesis fails to explain the evolutionary dynamics of recoding sites in 
coleoids. Instead, our results indicate that a large fraction of the shared, 
strongly recoded, sites in coleoids have been selected for proteome 
diversification, meaning that the fitness of an editable A is higher than an 
uneditable A or a genomically encoded G.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab154
PMCID: PMC8382921
PMID: 34022057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


880. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4252-4267. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab155.

The Worldwide Invasion of Drosophila suzukii Is Accompanied by a Large Increase 
of Transposable Element Load and a Small Number of Putatively Adaptive 
Insertions.

Mérel V(1), Gibert P(1), Buch I(1), Rodriguez Rada V(1), Estoup A(2), Gautier 
M(2), Fablet M(1), Boulesteix M(1), Vieira C(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR 5558, CNRS, Université de 
Lyon, Villeurbanne, France.
(2)CIRAD, INRAE, Institut Agro, IRD, CBGP - University of Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.

Transposable elements (TEs) are ubiquitous and mobile repeated sequences. They 
are major determinants of host fitness. Here, we characterized the TE content of 
the spotted wing fly Drosophila suzukii. Using a recently improved genome 
assembly, we reconstructed TE sequences de novo and found that TEs occupy 47% of 
the genome and are mostly located in gene-poor regions. The majority of TE 
insertions segregate at low frequencies, indicating a recent and probably 
ongoing TE activity. To explore TE dynamics in the context of biological 
invasions, we studied the variation of TE abundance in genomic data from 16 
invasive and six native populations of D. suzukii. We found a large increase of 
the TE load in invasive populations correlated with a reduced Watterson estimate 
of genetic diversity θw^ a proxy of effective population size. We did not find 
any correlation between TE contents and bioclimatic variables, indicating a 
minor effect of environmentally induced TE activity. A genome-wide association 
study revealed that ca. 2,000 genomic regions are associated with TE abundance. 
We did not find, however, any evidence in such regions of an enrichment for 
genes known to interact with TE activity (e.g., transcription factor encoding 
genes or genes of the piRNA pathway). Finally, the study of TE insertion 
frequencies revealed 15 putatively adaptive TE insertions, six of them being 
likely associated with the recent invasion history of the species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab155
PMCID: PMC8476158
PMID: 34021759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


881. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3804-3819. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab158.

Genetic Origins and Sex-Biased Admixture of the Huis.

Ma X(1), Yang W(2), Gao Y(1)(3), Pan Y(1), Lu Y(1)(4), Chen H(1), Lu D(1), Xu 
S(1)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and 
Health, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Fertility Preservation and Maintenance, The General 
Hospital, Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan, Ningxia, China.
(3)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, 
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Collaborative Innovation Center 
for Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, 
Shanghai, China.
(5)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(6)Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China.
(7)Human Phenome Institute, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

The Hui people are unique among Chinese ethnic minorities in that they speak the 
same language as Han Chinese (HAN) but practice Islam. However, as the 
second-largest minority group in China numbering well over 10 million, the Huis 
are under-represented in both global and regional genomic studies. Here, we 
present the first whole-genome sequencing effort of 234 Hui individuals (NXH) 
aged over 60 who have been living in Ningxia, where the Huis are mostly 
concentrated. NXH are genetically more similar to East Asian than to any other 
global populations. In particular, the genetic differentiation between NXH and 
HAN (FST = 0.0015) is only slightly larger than that between northern and 
southern HAN (FST = 0.0010), largely attributed to the western ancestry in NXH 
(∼10%). Highly differentiated functional variants between NXH and HAN were 
identified in genes associated with skin pigmentation (e.g., SLC24A5), facial 
morphology (e.g., EDAR), and lipid metabolism (e.g., ABCG8). The Huis are also 
distinct from other Muslim groups such as the Uyghurs (FST = 0.0187), 
especially, NXH derived much less western ancestry (∼10%) compared with the 
Uyghurs (∼50%). Modeling admixture history indicated that NXH experienced an 
episode of two-wave admixture. An ancient admixture occurred ∼1,025 years ago, 
reflecting the intensive west-east contacts during the late Tang Dynasty, and 
the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period. A recent admixture occurred 
∼500 years ago, corresponding to the Ming Dynasty. Notably, we identified 
considerable sex-biased admixture, that is, excess of western males and eastern 
females contributing to the NXH gene pool. The origins and the genomic diversity 
of the Hui people imply the complex history of contacts between western and 
eastern Eurasians.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab158
PMCID: PMC8382924
PMID: 34021754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


882. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4268-4285. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab156.

Integrated Environmental and Genomic Analysis Reveals the Drivers of Local 
Adaptation in African Indigenous Chickens.

Gheyas AA(1), Vallejo-Trujillo A(2), Kebede A(3)(4), Lozano-Jaramillo M(5), 
Dessie T(3), Smith J(1), Hanotte O(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Tropical Livestock Genetics and Health (CTLGH), The Roslin 
Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Cells, Organism and Molecular Genetics, School of Life Sciences, University 
of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(3)LiveGene-CTLGH, International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI) Ethiopia, 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(4)Amhara Regional Agricultural Research Institute, Bahir Dar, Ethiopia.
(5)Wageningen University & Research Animal Breeding and Genomics, Wageningen, 
The Netherlands.

Breeding for climate resilience is currently an important goal for sustainable 
livestock production. Local adaptations exhibited by indigenous livestock allow 
investigating the genetic control of this resilience. Ecological niche modeling 
(ENM) provides a powerful avenue to identify the main environmental drivers of 
selection. Here, we applied an integrative approach combining ENM with 
genome-wide selection signature analyses (XPEHH and Fst) and 
genotype-environment association (redundancy analysis), with the aim of 
identifying the genomic signatures of adaptation in African village chickens. By 
dissecting 34 agro-climatic variables from the ecosystems of 25 Ethiopian 
village chicken populations, ENM identified six key drivers of environmental 
challenges: One temperature variable-strongly correlated with elevation, three 
precipitation variables as proxies for water availability, and two soil/land 
cover variables as proxies of food availability for foraging chickens. Genome 
analyses based on whole-genome sequencing (n = 245), identified a few strongly 
supported genomic regions under selection for environmental challenges related 
to altitude, temperature, water scarcity, and food availability. These regions 
harbor several gene clusters including regulatory genes, suggesting a 
predominantly oligogenic control of environmental adaptation. Few candidate 
genes detected in relation to heat-stress, indicates likely epigenetic 
regulation of thermo-tolerance for a domestic species originating from a 
tropical Asian wild ancestor. These results provide possible explanations for 
the rapid past adaptation of chickens to diverse African agro-ecologies, while 
also representing new landmarks for sustainable breeding improvement for climate 
resilience. We show that the pre-identification of key environmental drivers, 
followed by genomic investigation, provides a powerful new approach for 
elucidating adaptation in domestic animals.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab156
PMCID: PMC8476150
PMID: 34021753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


883. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3789-3803. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab157.

Bacterial Evolutionary Precursors of Eukaryotic Copper-Zinc Superoxide 
Dismutases.

Wright GSA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Systems Biology, Institute of Systems, Molecular 
and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Internalization of a bacteria by an archaeal cell expedited eukaryotic 
evolution. An important feature of the species that diversified into the great 
variety of eukaryotic life visible today was the ability to combat oxidative 
stress with a copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (CuZnSOD) enzyme activated by a 
specific, high-affinity copper chaperone. Adoption of a single protein interface 
that facilitates homodimerization and heterodimerization was essential; however, 
its evolution has been difficult to rationalize given the structural differences 
between bacterial and eukaryotic enzymes. In contrast, no consistent strategy 
for the maturation of periplasmic bacterial CuZnSODs has emerged. Here, 34 
CuZnSODs are described that closely resemble the eukaryotic form but originate 
predominantly from aquatic bacteria. Crystal structures of a Bacteroidetes 
bacterium CuZnSOD portray both prokaryotic and eukaryotic characteristics and 
propose a mechanism for self-catalyzed disulfide maturation. Unification of a 
bacterial but eukaryotic-like CuZnSOD along with a ferredoxin-fold MXCXXC 
copper-binding domain within a single polypeptide created the advanced copper 
delivery system for CuZnSODs exemplified by the human copper chaperone for 
superoxide dismutase-1. The development of this system facilitated evolution of 
large and compartmentalized cells following endosymbiotic eukaryogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab157
PMCID: PMC8382915
PMID: 34021750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


884. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3031. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab100.

Erratum to: Genus-wide characterization of bumblebee genomes provides insights 
into their evolution and variation in ecological and behavioral traits.

Sun C, Huang J, Wang Y, Zhao X, Su L, Thomas GWC, Zhao M, Zhang X, Jungreis I, 
Kellis M, Vicario S, Sharakhov IV, Bondarenko SM, Hasselmann M, Kim CN, Paten B, 
Penso-Dolfin L, Wang L, Chang Y, Gao Q, Ma L, Ma L, Zhang Z, Zhang H, Zhang H, 
Ruzzante L, Robertson HM, Zhu Y, Liu Y, Yang H, Ding L, Wang Q, Ma D, Xu W, 
Liang C, Itgen MW, Mee L, Cao G, Zhang Z, Sadd BM, Hahn MW, Schaack S, Barribeau 
SM, Williams PH, Waterhouse RM, Mueller RL.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):486-501.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab100
PMCID: PMC8233484
PMID: 34015138


885. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):4043-4055. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab153.

A Bivalve Biomineralization Toolbox.

Yarra T(1)(2), Blaxter M(3), Clark MS(2).

Author information:
(1)Ashworth Laboratories, Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)British Antarctic Survey, Natural Environment Research Council, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United 
Kingdom.

Mollusc shells are a result of the deposition of crystalline and amorphous 
calcite catalyzed by enzymes and shell matrix proteins (SMP). Developing a 
detailed understanding of bivalve mollusc biomineralization pathways is 
complicated not only by the multiplicity of shell forms and microstructures in 
this class, but also by the evolution of associated proteins by domain co-option 
and domain shuffling. In spite of this, a minimal biomineralization toolbox 
comprising proteins and protein domains critical for shell production across 
species has been identified. Using a matched pair design to reduce experimental 
noise from inter-individual variation, combined with damage-repair experiments 
and a database of biomineralization SMPs derived from published works, proteins 
were identified that are likely to be involved in shell calcification. Eighteen 
new, shared proteins likely to be involved in the processes related to the 
calcification of shells were identified by the analysis of genes expressed 
during repair in Crassostrea gigas, Mytilus edulis, and Pecten maximus. Genes 
involved in ion transport were also identified as potentially involved in 
calcification either via the maintenance of cell acid-base balance or transport 
of critical ions to the extrapallial space, the site of shell assembly. These 
data expand the number of candidate biomineralization proteins in bivalve 
molluscs for future functional studies and define a minimal functional protein 
domain set required to produce solid microstructures from soluble calcium 
carbonate. This is important for understanding molluscan shell evolution, the 
likely impacts of environmental change on biomineralization processes, materials 
science, and biomimicry research.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab153
PMCID: PMC8382897
PMID: 34014311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


886. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3029. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab116.

Corrigendum to: Limited evolutionary conservation of multidrug resistance and 
collateral sensitivity.

Apjok G, Boross G, Nyerges Á, Fekete G, Lázár V, Papp B, Pál C, Csörgő B.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1601-1611.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab116
PMCID: PMC8233497
PMID: 34010424


887. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3032. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab135.

Erratum to: A Bayesian mutation-selection framework for detecting site-specific 
adaptive evolution in protein-coding genes.

Rodrigue N, Latrille T, Lartillot N.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1199-1208.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab135
PMCID: PMC8233490
PMID: 34010420


888. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):4010-4024. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab149.

Fundamental Identifiability Limits in Molecular Epidemiology.

Louca S(1)(2), McLaughlin A(3)(4), MacPherson A(5)(6)(7), Joy JB(3)(4)(8), 
Pennell MW(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.
(2)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.
(3)British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Bioinformatics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

Viral phylogenies provide crucial information on the spread of infectious 
diseases, and many studies fit mathematical models to phylogenetic data to 
estimate epidemiological parameters such as the effective reproduction ratio 
(Re) over time. Such phylodynamic inferences often complement or even substitute 
for conventional surveillance data, particularly when sampling is poor or 
delayed. It remains generally unknown, however, how robust phylodynamic 
epidemiological inferences are, especially when there is uncertainty regarding 
pathogen prevalence and sampling intensity. Here, we use recently developed 
mathematical techniques to fully characterize the information that can possibly 
be extracted from serially collected viral phylogenetic data, in the context of 
the commonly used birth-death-sampling model. We show that for any candidate 
epidemiological scenario, there exists a myriad of alternative, markedly 
different, and yet plausible "congruent" scenarios that cannot be distinguished 
using phylogenetic data alone, no matter how large the data set. In the absence 
of strong constraints or rate priors across the entire study period, neither 
maximum-likelihood fitting nor Bayesian inference can reliably reconstruct the 
true epidemiological dynamics from phylogenetic data alone; rather, estimators 
can only converge to the "congruence class" of the true dynamics. We propose 
concrete and feasible strategies for making more robust epidemiological 
inferences from viral phylogenetic data.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab149
PMCID: PMC8382926
PMID: 34009339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


889. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3028. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab012.

Treasurer's Report for Financial Year (FY) 2019.

Thorne JL, Archibald JM.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab012
PMCID: PMC8233483
PMID: 34009329


890. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3060-3077. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab131.

Diverse Molecular Mechanisms Contribute to Differential Expression of Human 
Duplicated Genes.

Shew CJ(1)(2), Carmona-Mora P(1)(3)(4), Soto DC(1)(2), Mastoras M(1), Roberts 
E(1), Rosas J(1)(5), Jagannathan D(1), Kaya G(1), O'Geen H(1), Dennis 
MY(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Genome Center, University of California Davis, CA, USA.
(2)Integrative Genetics and Genomics Graduate Group, University of California 
Davis, CA, USA.
(3)MIND Institute, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(4)Autism Research Training Program, University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Postbaccalaureate Research Education Program, University of California, 
Davis, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Medicine, University of California, 
Davis, CA, USA.

Emerging evidence links genes within human-specific segmental duplications 
(HSDs) to traits and diseases unique to our species. Strikingly, despite being 
nearly identical by sequence (>98.5%), paralogous HSD genes are differentially 
expressed across human cell and tissue types, though the underlying mechanisms 
have not been examined. We compared cross-tissue mRNA levels of 75 HSD genes 
from 30 families between humans and chimpanzees and found expression patterns 
consistent with relaxed selection on or neofunctionalization of derived 
paralogs. In general, ancestral paralogs exhibited greatest expression 
conservation with chimpanzee orthologs, though exceptions suggest certain 
derived paralogs may retain or supplant ancestral functions. Concordantly, 
analysis of long-read isoform sequencing data sets from diverse human tissues 
and cell lines found that about half of derived paralogs exhibited globally 
lower expression. To understand mechanisms underlying these differences, we 
leveraged data from human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) and found no 
relationship between paralogous expression divergence and post-transcriptional 
regulation, sequence divergence, or copy-number variation. Considering 
cis-regulation, we reanalyzed ENCODE data and recovered hundreds of previously 
unidentified candidate CREs in HSDs. We also generated large-insert 
ChIP-sequencing data for active chromatin features in an LCL to better 
distinguish paralogous regions. Some duplicated CREs were sufficient to drive 
differential reporter activity, suggesting they may contribute to divergent 
cis-regulation of paralogous genes. This work provides evidence that 
cis-regulatory divergence contributes to novel expression patterns of recent 
gene duplicates in humans.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab131
PMCID: PMC8321529
PMID: 34009325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


891. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3030. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab097.

Erratum to: Bridging themes: short protein segments found in different 
architectures.

Kolodny R, Nepomnyachiy S, Tawfik DS, Ben-Tal N.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2191-2208.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab097
PMCID: PMC8233499
PMID: 34009324


892. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4135-4148. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab136.

Xenogeneic Silencing and Bacterial Genome Evolution: Mechanisms for DNA 
Recognition Imply Multifaceted Roles of Xenogeneic Silencers.

Duan B(1), Ding P(1), Navarre WW(2), Liu J(2), Xia B(1).

Author information:
(1)Beijing Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center, College of Chemistry and Molecular 
Engineering, and School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is a major driving force for bacterial evolution. 
To avoid the deleterious effects due to the unregulated expression of newly 
acquired foreign genes, bacteria have evolved specific proteins named xenogeneic 
silencers to recognize foreign DNA sequences and suppress their transcription. 
As there is considerable diversity in genomic base compositions among bacteria, 
how xenogeneic silencers distinguish self- from nonself DNA in different 
bacteria remains poorly understood. This review summarizes the progress in 
studying the DNA binding preferences and the underlying molecular mechanisms of 
known xenogeneic silencer families, represented by H-NS of Escherichia coli, 
Lsr2 of Mycobacterium, MvaT of Pseudomonas, and Rok of Bacillus. Comparative 
analyses of the published data indicate that the differences in DNA recognition 
mechanisms enable these xenogeneic silencers to have clear characteristics in 
DNA sequence preferences, which are further correlated with different host 
genomic features. These correlations provide insights into the mechanisms of how 
these xenogeneic silencers selectively target foreign DNA in different genomic 
backgrounds. Furthermore, it is revealed that the genomic AT contents of 
bacterial species with the same xenogeneic silencer family proteins are 
distributed in a limited range and are generally lower than those species 
without any known xenogeneic silencers in the same phylum/class/genus, 
indicating that xenogeneic silencers have multifaceted roles on bacterial genome 
evolution. In addition to regulating horizontal gene transfer, xenogeneic 
silencers also act as a selective force against the GC to AT mutational bias 
found in bacterial genomes and help the host genomic AT contents maintained at 
relatively low levels.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab136
PMCID: PMC8476142
PMID: 34003286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


893. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4238-4251. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab152.

A Chromosome-Level Assembly of Blunt Snout Bream (Megalobrama amblycephala) 
Genome Reveals an Expansion of Olfactory Receptor Genes in Freshwater Fish.

Liu H(1)(2), Chen C(3), Lv M(1), Liu N(1), Hu Y(3), Zhang H(3), Enbody ED(4), 
Gao Z(1)(2), Andersson L(4)(5)(6), Wang W(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Fisheries, Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and 
Reproduction of Ministry of Education/Key Lab of Freshwater Animal Breeding, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Huazhong Agricultural University, 
Wuhan, China.
(2)Hubei Hongshan Laboratory, Engineering Research Center of Green Development 
for Conventional Aquatic Biological Industry in the Yangtze River Economic Belt, 
Ministry of Education, Wuhan, China.
(3)BGI Genomics, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA.
(6)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

The number of olfactory receptor genes (ORs), which are responsible for 
detecting diverse odor molecules varies extensively among mammals as a result of 
frequent gene gains and losses that contribute to olfactory specialization. 
However, how OR expansions/contractions in fish are influenced by habitat and 
feeding habit and which OR subfamilies are important in each ecological niche is 
unknown. Here, we report a major OR expansion in a freshwater herbivorous fish, 
Megalobrama amblycephala, using a highly contiguous, chromosome-level assembly. 
We evaluate the possible contribution of OR expansion to habitat and feeding 
specialization by comparing the OR repertoire in 28 phylogenetically and 
ecologically diverse teleosts. In total, we analyzed > 4,000 ORs including 3,253 
intact, 122 truncated, and 913 pseudogenes. The number of intact ORs is highly 
variable ranging from 20 to 279. We estimate that the most recent common 
ancestor of Osteichthyes had 62 intact ORs, which declined in most lineages 
except the freshwater Otophysa clade that has a substantial expansion in 
subfamily β and ε ORs. Across teleosts, we found a strong association between 
duplications of β and ε ORs and freshwater habitat. Nearly, all ORs were 
expressed in the olfactory epithelium (OE) in three tested fish species. 
Specifically, all the expanded β and ε ORs were highly expressed in OE of M. 
amblycephala. Together, we provide molecular and functional evidence for how OR 
repertoires in fish have undergone gain and loss with respect to ecological 
factors and highlight the role of β and ε OR in freshwater adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab152
PMCID: PMC8476165
PMID: 34003267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


894. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4059-4076. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab147.

Analysis of Genomic DNA from Medieval Plague Victims Suggests Long-Term Effect 
of Yersinia pestis on Human Immunity Genes.

Immel A(1)(2)(3), Key FM(1)(4), Szolek A(5), Barquera R(1), Robinson MK(6), 
Harrison GF(6), Palmer WH(6), Spyrou MA(1)(3), Susat J(2), Krause-Kyora B(2), 
Bos KI(1)(3), Forrest S(3), Hernández-Zaragoza DI(1)(7), Sauter J(8), Solloch 
U(8), Schmidt AH(8), Schuenemann VJ(3)(9), Reiter E(3)(9), Kairies MS(10), Weiß 
R(11), Arnold S(11), Wahl J(10)(11), Hollenbach JA(12), Kohlbacher 
O(5)(13)(14)(15)(16), Herbig A(1)(3), Norman PJ(6), Krause J(1)(3)(17).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History, Jena, Germany.
(2)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Institute of Archaeological Sciences, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Applied Bioinformatics, Department for Computer Science, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Division of Biomedical Informatics and Personalized Medicine, and Department 
of Immunology & Microbiology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA.
(7)Immunogenetics Unit, Técnicas Genéticas Aplicadas a la Clínica (TGAC), Mexico 
City, Mexico.
(8)DKMS, Tübingen, Germany.
(9)Institute of Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(10)Institute for Archaeological Sciences, WG Palaeoanthropology, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(11)State Office for Cultural Heritage Management, Stuttgart Regional Council, 
Esslingen, Germany.
(12)UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences, Department of Neurology, University 
of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(13)Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(14)Quantitative Biology Center, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(15)Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(16)Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, 
Tübingen, Germany.
(17)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.

Pathogens and associated outbreaks of infectious disease exert selective 
pressure on human populations, and any changes in allele frequencies that result 
may be especially evident for genes involved in immunity. In this regard, the 
1346-1353 Yersinia pestis-caused Black Death pandemic, with continued plague 
outbreaks spanning several hundred years, is one of the most devastating 
recorded in human history. To investigate the potential impact of Y. pestis on 
human immunity genes, we extracted DNA from 36 plague victims buried in a mass 
grave in Ellwangen, Germany in the 16th century. We targeted 488 immune-related 
genes, including HLA, using a novel in-solution hybridization capture approach. 
In comparison with 50 modern native inhabitants of Ellwangen, we find 
differences in allele frequencies for variants of the innate immunity proteins 
Ficolin-2 and NLRP14 at sites involved in determining specificity. We also 
observed that HLA-DRB1*13 is more than twice as frequent in the modern 
population, whereas HLA-B alleles encoding an isoleucine at position 80 (I-80+), 
HLA C*06:02 and HLA-DPB1 alleles encoding histidine at position 9 are half as 
frequent in the modern population. Simulations show that natural selection has 
likely driven these allele frequency changes. Thus, our data suggest that allele 
frequencies of HLA genes involved in innate and adaptive immunity responsible 
for extracellular and intracellular responses to pathogenic bacteria, such as Y. 
pestis, could have been affected by the historical epidemics that occurred in 
Europe.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab147
PMCID: PMC8476174
PMID: 34002224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


895. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3637-3648. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab129.

The Evolution Pathway of Ammonia-Oxidizing Archaea Shaped by Major Geological 
Events.

Yang Y(1), Zhang C(2)(3)(4), Lenton TM(5), Yan X(1), Zhu M(6)(7), Zhou M(1), Tao 
J(2), Phelps TJ(2), Cao Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai 10th People's Hospital, School of 
Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Archaea Geo-Omics, Southern University of 
Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Guangzhou), 
Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Biogeochemistry, Shanghai Sheshan National Geophysical 
Observatory, 201602 Shanghai, China.
(5)Global Systems Institute, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Palaeobiology and Stratigraphy & Center for 
Excellence in Life and Paleoenvironment, Nanjing Institute of Geology and 
Palaeontology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, China.
(7)College of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, China.

Primordial nitrification processes have been studied extensively using 
geochemical approaches, but the biological origination of nitrification remains 
unclear. Ammonia-oxidizing archaea (AOA) are widely distributed nitrifiers and 
implement the rate-limiting step in nitrification. They are hypothesized to have 
been important players in the global nitrogen cycle in Earth's early history. We 
performed systematic phylogenomic and marker gene analyses to elucidate the 
diversification timeline of AOA evolution. Our results suggested that the AOA 
ancestor experienced terrestrial geothermal environments at ∼1,165 Ma (1,928-880 
Ma), and gradually evolved into mesophilic soil at ∼652 Ma (767-554 Ma) before 
diversifying into marine settings at ∼509 Ma (629-412 Ma) and later into shallow 
and deep oceans, respectively. Corroborated by geochemical evidence and 
modeling, the timing of key diversification nodes can be linked to the global 
magmatism and glaciation associated with the assembly and breakup of the 
supercontinent Rodinia, and the later oxygenation of the deep ocean. Results of 
this integrated study shed light on the geological forces that may have shaped 
the evolutionary pathways of the AOA, which played an important role in the 
ancient global nitrogen cycle.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab129
PMCID: PMC8382903
PMID: 33993308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


896. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):4025-4038. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab151.

Phylogenomic Subsampling and the Search for Phylogenetically Reliable Loci.

Mongiardino Koch N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Earth & Planetary Sciences, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 
USA.

Phylogenomic subsampling is a procedure by which small sets of loci are selected 
from large genome-scale data sets and used for phylogenetic inference. This step 
is often motivated by either computational limitations associated with the use 
of complex inference methods or as a means of testing the robustness of 
phylogenetic results by discarding loci that are deemed potentially misleading. 
Although many alternative methods of phylogenomic subsampling have been 
proposed, little effort has gone into comparing their behavior across different 
data sets. Here, I calculate multiple gene properties for a range of 
phylogenomic data sets spanning animal, fungal, and plant clades, uncovering a 
remarkable predictability in their patterns of covariance. I also show how these 
patterns provide a means for ordering loci by both their rate of evolution and 
their relative phylogenetic usefulness. This method of retrieving 
phylogenetically useful loci is found to be among the top performing when 
compared with alternative subsampling protocols. Relatively common approaches 
such as minimizing potential sources of systematic bias or increasing the 
clock-likeness of the data are found to fare worse than selecting loci at 
random. Likewise, the general utility of rate-based subsampling is found to be 
limited: loci evolving at both low and high rates are among the least effective, 
and even those evolving at optimal rates can still widely differ in usefulness. 
This study shows that many common subsampling approaches introduce unintended 
effects in off-target gene properties and proposes an alternative multivariate 
method that simultaneously optimizes phylogenetic signal while controlling for 
known sources of bias.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab151
PMCID: PMC8382905
PMID: 33983409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


897. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3972-3992. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab148.

Comparative Analyses of Gibbon Centromeres Reveal Dynamic Genus-Specific Shifts 
in Repeat Composition.

Hartley GA(1), Okhovat M(2), O'Neill RJ(1)(3)(4), Carbone L(2)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
CT, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health and 
Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(3)Institute for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Genomics and Genome Sciences, UConn Health, Farmington, CT, 
USA.
(5)Division of Genetics, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, OR, 
USA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(7)Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health 
and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

Centromeres are functionally conserved chromosomal loci essential for proper 
chromosome segregation during cell division, yet they show high sequence 
diversity across species. Despite their variation, a near universal feature of 
centromeres is the presence of repetitive sequences, such as DNA satellites and 
transposable elements (TEs). Because of their rapidly evolving karyotypes, 
gibbons represent a compelling model to investigate divergence of functional 
centromere sequences across short evolutionary timescales. In this study, we use 
ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, and fluorescence in situ hybridization to comprehensively 
investigate the centromeric repeat content of the four extant gibbon genera 
(Hoolock, Hylobates, Nomascus, and Siamang). In all gibbon genera, we find that 
CENP-A nucleosomes and the DNA-proteins that interface with the inner 
kinetochore preferentially bind retroelements of broad classes rather than 
satellite DNA. A previously identified gibbon-specific composite 
retrotransposon, LAVA, known to be expanded within the centromere regions of one 
gibbon genus (Hoolock), displays centromere- and species-specific sequence 
differences, potentially as a result of its co-option to a centromeric function. 
When dissecting centromere satellite composition, we discovered the presence of 
the retroelement-derived macrosatellite SST1 in multiple centromeres of Hoolock, 
whereas alpha-satellites represent the predominate satellite in the other 
genera, further suggesting an independent evolutionary trajectory for Hoolock 
centromeres. Finally, using de novo assembly of centromere sequences, we 
determined that transcripts originating from gibbon centromeres recapitulate the 
species-specific TE composition. Combined, our data reveal dynamic shifts in the 
repeat content that define gibbon centromeres and coincide with the extensive 
karyotypic diversity within this lineage.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab148
PMCID: PMC8382927
PMID: 33983366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


898. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2673. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab066.

Corrigendum to: Genomic analysis revealed a convergent evolution of LINE-1 in 
coat color: A case study in water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis).

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1122-1136.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab066
PMCID: PMC8136481
PMID: 33982747


899. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3754-3774. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab146.

Resurrection of Ancestral Malate Dehydrogenases Reveals the Evolutionary History 
of Halobacterial Proteins: Deciphering Gene Trajectories and Changes in 
Biochemical Properties.

Blanquart S(1), Groussin M(2)(3), Le Roy A(4), Szöllosi GJ(2)(5), Girard E(4), 
Franzetti B(4), Gouy M(2), Madern D(4).

Author information:
(1)Univ Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, France.
(2)Université Lyon 1, CNRS, UMR5558, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie 
Évolutive, Villeurbanne, France.
(3)Center for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Univ Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS, Grenoble, France.
(5)MTA-ELTE "Lendulet" Evolutionary Genomics Research Group, Budapest, Hungary.

Extreme halophilic Archaea thrive in high salt, where, through proteomic 
adaptation, they cope with the strong osmolarity and extreme ionic conditions of 
their environment. In spite of wide fundamental interest, however, studies 
providing insights into this adaptation are scarce, because of practical 
difficulties inherent to the purification and characterization of halophilic 
enzymes. In this work, we describe the evolutionary history of malate 
dehydrogenases (MalDH) within Halobacteria (a class of the Euryarchaeota 
phylum). We resurrected nine ancestors along the inferred halobacterial MalDH 
phylogeny, including the Last Common Ancestral MalDH of Halobacteria (LCAHa) and 
compared their biochemical properties with those of five modern halobacterial 
MalDHs. We monitored the stability of these various MalDHs, their oligomeric 
states and enzymatic properties, as a function of concentration for different 
salts in the solvent. We found that a variety of evolutionary processes, such as 
amino acid replacement, gene duplication, loss of MalDH gene and replacement 
owing to horizontal transfer resulted in significant differences in solubility, 
stability and catalytic properties between these enzymes in the three 
Halobacteriales, Haloferacales, and Natrialbales orders since the LCAHa MalDH. 
We also showed how a stability trade-off might favor the emergence of new 
properties during adaptation to diverse environmental conditions. Altogether, 
our results suggest a new view of halophilic protein adaptation in Archaea.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab146
PMCID: PMC8382911
PMID: 33974066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


900. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3621-3636. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab128.

Comparative Genome Analyses Highlight Transposon-Mediated Genome Expansion and 
the Evolutionary Architecture of 3D Genomic Folding in Cotton.

Wang M(1), Li J(1), Wang P(1), Liu F(2), Liu Z(1), Zhao G(1), Xu Z(1), Pei L(1), 
Grover CE(3), Wendel JF(3), Wang K(2), Zhang X(1).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese 
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang, Henan, China.
(3)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, USA.

Transposable element (TE) amplification has been recognized as a driving force 
mediating genome size expansion and evolution, but the consequences for shaping 
3D genomic architecture remains largely unknown in plants. Here, we report 
reference-grade genome assemblies for three species of cotton ranging 3-fold in 
genome size, namely Gossypium rotundifolium (K2), G. arboreum (A2), and G. 
raimondii (D5), using Oxford Nanopore Technologies. Comparative genome analyses 
document the details of lineage-specific TE amplification contributing to the 
large genome size differences (K2, 2.44 Gb; A2, 1.62 Gb; D5, 750.19 Mb) and 
indicate relatively conserved gene content and synteny relationships among 
genomes. We found that approximately 17% of syntenic genes exhibit chromatin 
status change between active ("A") and inactive ("B") compartments, and TE 
amplification was associated with the increase of the proportion of A 
compartment in gene regions (∼7,000 genes) in K2 and A2 relative to D5. Only 42% 
of topologically associating domain (TAD) boundaries were conserved among the 
three genomes. Our data implicate recent amplification of TEs following the 
formation of lineage-specific TAD boundaries. This study sheds light on the role 
of transposon-mediated genome expansion in the evolution of higher-order 
chromatin structure in plants.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab128
PMCID: PMC8382922
PMID: 33973633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


901. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3681-3696. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab138.

Modeling the Evolutionary Architectures of Transcribed Human Enhancer Sequences 
Reveals Distinct Origins, Functions, and Associations with Human Trait 
Variation.

Fong SL(1), Capra JA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Genetics Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Bakar Computational Health Sciences Institute and Department of Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Despite the importance of gene regulatory enhancers in human biology and 
evolution, we lack a comprehensive model of enhancer evolution and function. 
This substantially limits our understanding of the genetic basis of species 
divergence and our ability to interpret the effects of noncoding variants on 
human traits. To explore enhancer sequence evolution and its relationship to 
regulatory function, we traced the evolutionary origins of transcribed human 
enhancer sequences with activity across diverse tissues and cellular contexts 
from the FANTOM5 consortium. The transcribed enhancers are enriched for 
sequences of a single evolutionary age ("simple" evolutionary architectures) 
compared with enhancers that are composites of sequences of multiple 
evolutionary ages ("complex" evolutionary architectures), likely indicating 
constraint against genomic rearrangements. Complex enhancers are older, more 
pleiotropic, and more active across species than simple enhancers. Genetic 
variants within complex enhancers are also less likely to associate with human 
traits and biochemical activity. Transposable-element-derived sequences (TEDS) 
have made diverse contributions to enhancers of both architectures; the majority 
of TEDS are found in enhancers with simple architectures, while a minority have 
remodeled older sequences to create complex architectures. Finally, we compare 
the evolutionary architectures of transcribed enhancers with 
histone-mark-defined enhancers. Our results reveal that most human transcribed 
enhancers are ancient sequences of a single age, and thus the evolution of most 
human enhancers was not driven by increases in evolutionary complexity over 
time. Our analyses further suggest that considering enhancer evolutionary 
histories provides context that can aid interpretation of the effects of 
variants on enhancer function. Based on these results, we propose a framework 
for analyzing enhancer evolutionary architecture.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab138
PMCID: PMC8382917
PMID: 33973014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


902. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3938-3952. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab132.

Resource Uptake and the Evolution of Moderately Efficient Enzymes.

Labourel F(1), Rajon E(1).

Author information:
(1)Univ Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie 
Evolutive UMR5558, Villeurbanne, France.

Enzymes speed up reactions that would otherwise be too slow to sustain the 
metabolism of selfreplicators. Yet, most enzymes seem only moderately efficient, 
exhibiting kinetic parameters orders of magnitude lower than their expected 
physically achievable maxima and spanning over surprisingly large ranges of 
values. Here, we question how these parameters evolve using a mechanistic model 
where enzyme efficiency is a key component of individual competition for 
resources. We show that kinetic parameters are under strong directional 
selection only up to a point, above which enzymes appear to evolve under 
near-neutrality, thereby confirming the qualitative observation of other 
modeling approaches. While the existence of a large fitness plateau could 
potentially explain the extensive variation in enzyme features reported, we show 
using a population genetics model that such a widespread distribution is an 
unlikely outcome of evolution on a common landscape, as mutation-selection-drift 
balance occupy a narrow area even when very moderate biases towards lower 
efficiency are considered. Instead, differences in the evolutionary context 
encountered by each enzyme should be involved, such that each evolves on an 
individual, unique landscape. Our results point to drift and effective 
population size playing an important role, along with the kinetics of nutrient 
transporters, the tolerance to high concentrations of intermediate metabolites, 
and the reversibility of reactions. Enzyme concentration also shapes selection 
on kinetic parameters, but we show that the joint evolution of concentration and 
efficiency does not yield extensive variance in evolutionary outcomes when 
documented costs to protein expression are applied.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab132
PMCID: PMC8382906
PMID: 33964160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


903. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3664-3675. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab133.

Sample Sequence Analysis Uncovers Recurrent Horizontal Transfers of Transposable 
Elements among Grasses.

Park M(1), Christin PA(2), Bennetzen JL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
United Kingdom.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Tea Plant Biology and Utilization, Anhui Agricultural 
University, Hefei, China.

Limited genome resources are a bottleneck in the study of horizontal transfer 
(HT) of DNA in plants. To solve this issue, we tested the usefulness of 
low-depth sequencing data generated from 19 previously uncharacterized panicoid 
grasses for HT investigation. We initially searched for horizontally transferred 
LTR-retrotransposons by comparing the 19 sample sequences to 115 angiosperm 
genome sequences. Frequent HTs of LTR-retrotransposons were identified solely 
between panicoids and rice (Oryza sativa). We consequently focused on additional 
Oryza species and conducted a nontargeted investigation of HT involving the 
panicoid genus Echinochloa, which showed the most HTs in the first set of 
analyses. The comparison of nine Echinochloa samples and ten Oryza species 
identified recurrent HTs of diverse transposable element (TE) types at different 
points in Oryza history, but no confirmed cases of HT for sequences other than 
TEs. One case of HT was observed from one Echinochloa species into one Oryza 
species with overlapping geographic distributions. Variation among species and 
data sets highlights difficulties in identifying all HT, but our investigations 
showed that sample sequence analyses can reveal the importance of HT for the 
diversification of the TE repertoire of plants.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab133
PMCID: PMC8382918
PMID: 33964159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


904. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3953-3971. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab143.

Locally Adaptive Inversions Modulate Genetic Variation at Different Geographic 
Scales in a Seaweed Fly.

Mérot C(1), Berdan EL(2), Cayuela H(1)(3), Djambazian H(4), Ferchaud AL(1), 
Laporte M(1), Normandeau E(1), Ragoussis J(4), Wellenreuther M(5)(6), Bernatchez 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de Biologie, Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes 
(IBIS), Université Laval, Québec, Canada.
(2)Department of Ecology, Environment and Plant Sciences, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(4)McGill Genome Center, McGill University, Montréal, Canada.
(5)Seafood Research Unit, Plant & Food Research, Port Nelson, Nelson, New 
Zealand.
(6)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Across a species range, multiple sources of environmental heterogeneity, at both 
small and large scales, create complex landscapes of selection, which may 
challenge adaptation, particularly when gene flow is high. One key to 
multidimensional adaptation may reside in the heterogeneity of recombination 
along the genome. Structural variants, like chromosomal inversions, reduce 
recombination, increasing linkage disequilibrium among loci at a potentially 
massive scale. In this study, we examined how chromosomal inversions shape 
genetic variation across a species range and ask how their contribution to 
adaptation in the face of gene flow varies across geographic scales. We sampled 
the seaweed fly Coelopa frigida along a bioclimatic gradient stretching across 
10° of latitude, a salinity gradient, and a range of heterogeneous, patchy 
habitats. We generated a chromosome-level genome assembly to analyze 1,446 
low-coverage whole genomes collected along those gradients. We found several 
large nonrecombining genomic regions, including putative inversions. In contrast 
to the collinear regions, inversions and low-recombining regions differentiated 
populations more strongly, either along an ecogeographic cline or at a 
fine-grained scale. These genomic regions were associated with environmental 
factors and adaptive phenotypes, albeit with contrasting patterns. Altogether, 
our results highlight the importance of recombination in shaping adaptation to 
environmental heterogeneity at local and large scales.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab143
PMCID: PMC8382925
PMID: 33963409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


905. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3697-3708. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab139.

Evidence for Selection in the Abundant Accessory Gene Content of a Prokaryote 
Pangenome.

Whelan FJ(1), Hall RJ(1)(2), McInerney JO(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Microbiology and Infection, College of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

A pangenome is the complete set of genes (core and accessory) present in a 
phylogenetic clade. We hypothesize that a pangenome's accessory gene content is 
structured and maintained by selection. To test this hypothesis, we interrogated 
the genomes of 40 Pseudomonas species for statistically significant coincident 
(i.e., co-occurring/avoiding) gene patterns. We found that 86.7% of common 
accessory genes are involved in ≥1 coincident relationship. Further, genes that 
co-occur and/or avoid each other-but are not vertically inherited-are more 
likely to share functional categories, are more likely to be simultaneously 
transcribed, and are more likely to produce interacting proteins, than would be 
expected by chance. These results are not due to coincident genes being adjacent 
to one another on the chromosome. Together, these findings suggest that the 
accessory genome is structured into sets of genes that function together within 
a given strain. Given the similarity of the Pseudomonas pangenome with open 
pangenomes of other prokaryotic species, we speculate that these results are 
generalizable.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab139
PMCID: PMC8382901
PMID: 33963386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


906. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3737-3741. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab142.

Mammals with Small Populations Do Not Exhibit Larger Genomes.

Roddy AB(1), Alvarez-Ponce D(2), Roy SW(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environment, Department of Biological Sciences, Florida 
International University, Miami, FL, USA.
(2)Biology Department, University of Nevada, Reno, NV, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.

Genome size in cellular organisms varies by six orders of magnitude, yet the 
cause of this large variation remains unexplained. The influential Drift-Barrier 
Hypothesis proposes that large genomes tend to evolve in small populations due 
to inefficient selection. However, to our knowledge no explicit tests of the 
Drift-Barrier Hypothesis have been reported. We performed the first explicit 
test, by comparing estimated census population size and genome size in mammals 
while incorporating potential covariates and the effect of shared evolutionary 
history. We found a lack of correlation between census population size and 
genome size among 199 species of mammals. These results suggest that population 
size is not the predominant factor influencing genome size and that the 
Drift-Barrier Hypothesis should be considered provisional.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab142
PMCID: PMC8382904
PMID: 33956142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


907. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4205-4221. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab144.

Population Structure Limits Parallel Evolution in Sticklebacks.

Fang B(1), Kemppainen P(1), Momigliano P(1), Merilä J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Ecological Genetics Research Unit, Organismal and Evolutionary Biology 
Research Programme, Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University 
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Research Division for Ecology and Biodiversity, The School of Biological 
Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Population genetic theory predicts that small effective population sizes (Ne) 
and restricted gene flow limit the potential for local adaptation. In 
particular, the probability of evolving similar phenotypes based on shared 
genetic mechanisms (i.e., parallel evolution), is expected to be reduced. We 
tested these predictions in a comparative genomic study of two ecologically 
similar and geographically codistributed stickleback species (viz. Gasterosteus 
aculeatus and Pungitius pungitius). We found that P. pungitius harbors less 
genetic diversity and exhibits higher levels of genetic differentiation and 
isolation-by-distance than G. aculeatus. Conversely, G. aculeatus exhibits a 
stronger degree of genetic parallelism across freshwater populations than P. 
pungitius: 2,996 versus 379 single nucleotide polymorphisms located within 26 
versus 9 genomic regions show evidence of selection in multiple freshwater 
populations of G. aculeatus and P. pungitius, respectively. Most regions 
involved in parallel evolution in G. aculeatus showed increased levels of 
divergence, suggestive of selection on ancient haplotypes. In contrast, 
haplotypes involved in freshwater adaptation in P. pungitius were younger. In 
accordance with theory, the results suggest that connectivity and genetic drift 
play crucial roles in determining the levels and geographic distribution of 
standing genetic variation, providing evidence that population subdivision 
limits local adaptation and therefore also the likelihood of parallel evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab144
PMCID: PMC8476136
PMID: 33956140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


908. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3724-3736. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab141.

Rapid Parallel Adaptation to Anthropogenic Heavy Metal Pollution.

Papadopulos AST(1)(2), Helmstetter AJ(2)(3), Osborne OG(1), Comeault AA(1), Wood 
DP(1), Straw EA(2)(4), Mason L(2), Fay MF(2)(5), Parker J(2)(6), Dunning LT(7), 
Foote AD(1)(8), Smith RJ(2), Lighten J(9).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Ecology and Evolution Bangor, Environment Centre Wales, School of 
Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, United Kingdom.
(2)Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom.
(3)FRB-CESAB, Institut Bouisson Bertrand, Rue de l'École de Médecine, 
Montpellier, France.
(4)Centre for Ecology, Evolution & Behaviour, Department of Biological Sciences, 
School for Life Sciences and the Environment, Royal Holloway University of 
London, Egham, United Kingdom.
(5)School of Plant Biology, University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, 
Australia.
(6)National Biofilms Innovation Centre, Department of Biological Sciences, 
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Natural History, Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology, NTNU University Museum, Trondheim, Norway.
(9)Biosciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.

The impact of human-mediated environmental change on the evolutionary 
trajectories of wild organisms is poorly understood. In particular, capacity of 
species to adapt rapidly (in hundreds of generations or less), reproducibly and 
predictably to extreme environmental change is unclear. Silene uniflora is 
predominantly a coastal species, but it has also colonized isolated, disused 
mines with phytotoxic, zinc-contaminated soils. To test whether rapid, parallel 
adaptation to anthropogenic pollution has taken place, we used reduced 
representation sequencing (ddRAD) to reconstruct the evolutionary history of 
geographically proximate mine and coastal population pairs and found largely 
independent colonization of mines from different coastal sites. Furthermore, our 
results show that parallel evolution of zinc tolerance has occurred without gene 
flow spreading adaptive alleles between mine populations. In genomic regions 
where signatures of selection were detected across multiple mine-coast pairs, we 
identified genes with functions linked to physiological differences between the 
putative ecotypes, although genetic differentiation at specific loci is only 
partially shared between mine populations. Our results are consistent with a 
complex, polygenic genetic architecture underpinning rapid adaptation. This 
shows that even under a scenario of strong selection and rapid adaptation, 
evolutionary responses to human activities (and other environmental challenges) 
may be idiosyncratic at the genetic level and, therefore, difficult to predict 
from genomic data.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab141
PMCID: PMC8382892
PMID: 33950261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


909. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3742-3753. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab145.

Evolutionary Dynamics of the OR Gene Repertoire in Teleost Fishes: Evidence of 
an Association with Changes in Olfactory Epithelium Shape.

Policarpo M(1), Bemis KE(2), Tyler JC(3), Metcalfe CJ(4), Laurenti P(5), Sandoz 
JC(1), Rétaux S(6), Casane D(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, IRD, UMR Évolution, Génomes, Comportement et 
Écologie, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)NOAA National Systematics Laboratory, National Museum of Natural History, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Department of Paleobiology, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, DC, USA.
(4)Independent Researcher, Nambour, QLD, PO Box 21, Australia.
(5)Université de Paris, Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Energies de Demain, 
Paris, France.
(6)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Institut des Neurosciences Paris-Saclay, 
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(7)Université de Paris, UFR Sciences du Vivant, Paris, France.

Teleost fishes perceive their environment through a range of sensory modalities, 
among which olfaction often plays an important role. Richness of the olfactory 
repertoire depends on the diversity of receptors coded by homologous genes 
classified into four families: OR, TAAR, VR1, and VR2. Herein, we focus on the 
OR gene repertoire. While independent large contractions of the OR gene 
repertoire associated with ecological transitions have been found in mammals, 
little is known about the diversity of the OR gene repertoire and its evolution 
in teleost fishes, a group that includes more than 34,000 living species. We 
analyzed genomes of 163 species representing diversity in this large group. We 
found a large range of variation in the number of functional OR genes, from 15 
in the Broad-nose Pipefish Syngnathus typhle and the Ocean Sunfish Mola mola, to 
429 in the Zig-zag Eel Mastacembelus armatus. The number of OR genes was higher 
in species when a multilamellar olfactory rosette was present. Moreover, the 
number of lamellae was correlated with the richness of the OR gene repertoire. 
While a slow and balanced birth-and-death process generally drives the evolution 
of the OR gene repertoire, we inferred several episodes of high rates of gene 
loss, sometimes followed by large gains in the number of OR genes. These gains 
coincide with morphological changes of the olfactory organ and suggest a strong 
functional association between changes in the morphology and the evolution of 
the OR gene repertoire.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab145
PMCID: PMC8661438
PMID: 33950257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


910. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3709-3723. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab140.

De Novo Mutation Rate Variation and Its Determinants in Chlamydomonas.

López-Cortegano E(1), Craig RJ(1), Chebib J(1), Samuels T(1), Morgan AD(1), 
Kraemer SA(2), Böndel KB(3), Ness RW(4), Colegrave N(1), Keightley PD(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biology, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Institute of Plant Breeding, Seed Science and Population Genetics, University 
of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON, 
Canada.

De novo mutations are central for evolution, since they provide the raw material 
for natural selection by regenerating genetic variation. However, studying de 
novo mutations is challenging and is generally restricted to model species, so 
we have a limited understanding of the evolution of the mutation rate and 
spectrum between closely related species. Here, we present a mutation 
accumulation (MA) experiment to study de novo mutation in the unicellular green 
alga Chlamydomonas incerta and perform comparative analyses with its closest 
known relative, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Using whole-genome sequencing data, 
we estimate that the median single nucleotide mutation (SNM) rate in C. incerta 
is μ = 7.6 × 10-10, and is highly variable between MA lines, ranging from 
μ = 0.35 × 10-10 to μ = 131.7 × 10-10. The SNM rate is strongly positively 
correlated with the mutation rate for insertions and deletions between lines 
(r > 0.97). We infer that the genomic factors associated with variation in the 
mutation rate are similar to those in C. reinhardtii, allowing for 
cross-prediction between species. Among these genomic factors, sequence context 
and complexity are more important than GC content. With the exception of a 
remarkably high C→T bias, the SNM spectrum differs markedly between the two 
Chlamydomonas species. Our results suggest that similar genomic and biological 
characteristics may result in a similar mutation rate in the two species, 
whereas the SNM spectrum has more freedom to diverge.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab140
PMCID: PMC8383909
PMID: 33950243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


911. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3478-3485. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab113.

The Pop-Gen Pipeline Platform: A Software Platform for Population Genomic 
Analyses.

Webb A(1), Knoblauch J(1), Sabankar N(2), Kallur AS(2), Hey J(1), Sethuraman 
A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Genetics and Genomics, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, California State University San Marcos, 
San Marcos, CA, USA.

The Pop-Gen Pipeline Platform (PPP) is a software platform for population 
genomic analyses. The PPP was designed as a collection of scripts that 
facilitate common population genomic workflows in a consistent and standardized 
Python environment. Functions were developed to encompass entire workflows, 
including input preparation, file format conversion, various population genomic 
analyses, and output generation. The platform has also been developed with 
reproducibility and extensibility of analyses in mind. The PPP is an open-source 
package that is available for download and use at 
https://ppp.readthedocs.io/en/latest/PPP_pages/install.html.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab113
PMCID: PMC8321520
PMID: 33950197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


912. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3649-3663. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab130.

Vulture Genomes Reveal Molecular Adaptations Underlying Obligate Scavenging and 
Low Levels of Genetic Diversity.

Zou D(1), Tian S(1), Zhang T(2), Zhuoma N(3), Wu G(4), Wang M(5), Dong L(6), 
Rossiter SJ(7), Zhao H(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Tibetan Centre for Ecology and Conservation at WHU-TU, 
Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest 
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, China.
(3)Research Center for Ecology, College of Science, Tibet University, Lhasa, 
China.
(4)Xining Wildlife Park of Qinghai Province, Xining, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Desert and Oasis Ecology, Xinjiang Institute of 
Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, China.
(6)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Ecological 
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 
China.
(7)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Obligate scavenging on the dead and decaying animal matter is a rare dietary 
specialization that in extant vertebrates is restricted to vultures. These birds 
perform essential ecological services, yet many vulture species have undergone 
recent steep population declines and are now endangered. To test for molecular 
adaptations underlying obligate scavenging in vultures, and to assess whether 
genomic features might have contributed to their population declines, we 
generated high-quality genomes of the Himalayan and bearded vultures, 
representing both independent origins of scavenging within the Accipitridae, 
alongside a sister taxon, the upland buzzard. By comparing our data to published 
sequences from other birds, we show that the evolution of obligate scavenging in 
vultures has been accompanied by widespread positive selection acting on genes 
underlying gastric acid production, and immunity. Moreover, we find evidence of 
parallel molecular evolution, with amino acid replacements shared among 
divergent lineages of these scavengers. Our genome-wide screens also reveal that 
both the Himalayan and bearded vultures exhibit low levels of genetic diversity, 
equating to around a half of the mean genetic diversity of other bird genomes 
examined. However, demographic reconstructions indicate that population declines 
began at around the Last Glacial Maximum, predating the well-documented dramatic 
declines of the past three decades. Taken together, our genomic analyses imply 
that vultures harbor unique adaptations for processing carrion, but that modern 
populations are genetically depauperate and thus especially vulnerable to 
further genetic erosion through anthropogenic activities.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab130
PMCID: PMC8382910
PMID: 33944941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


913. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3676-3680. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab134.

Structural Variants Selected during Yak Domestication Inferred from Long-Read 
Whole-Genome Sequencing.

Zhang S(1), Liu W(1), Liu X(1), Du X(1), Zhang K(1), Zhang Y(2), Song Y(3), Zi 
Y(4), Qiu Q(1), Lenstra JA(5), Liu J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Grassland and Agro-ecosystem, Institute of Innovation 
Ecology and School of Life Science, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(2)The Supercomputing Center, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Animal Disease Prevention and Control Center of Gangcha County, Haibei 
Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, China.
(4)Animal Husbandry Workstation of Xiahe County, Gannan Tibetan Autonomous 
Prefecture, China.
(5)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Structural variants (SVs) represent an important genetic resource for both 
natural and artificial selection. Here we present a chromosome-scale reference 
genome for domestic yak (Bos grunniens) that has longer contigs and scaffolds 
(N50 44.72 and 114.39 Mb, respectively) than reported for any other ruminant 
genome. We further obtained long-read resequencing data for 6 wild and 23 
domestic yaks and constructed a genetic SV map of 372,220 SVs that covers the 
geographic range of the yaks. The majority of the SVs contains repetitive 
sequences and several are in or near genes. By comparing SVs in domestic and 
wild yaks, we identified genes that are predominantly related to the nervous 
system, behavior, immunity, and reproduction and may have been targeted by 
artificial selection during yak domestication. These findings provide new 
insights in the domestication of animals living at high altitude and highlight 
the importance of SVs in animal domestication.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab134
PMCID: PMC8382902
PMID: 33944937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


914. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3606-3620. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab127.

Elephant Genomes Reveal Accelerated Evolution in Mechanisms Underlying Disease 
Defenses.

Tollis M(1)(2), Ferris E(3), Campbell MS(4), Harris VK(2)(5), Rupp SM(2)(5), 
Harrison TM(2)(6), Kiso WK(7), Schmitt DL(7)(8), Garner MM(9), Aktipis 
CA(2)(10), Maley CC(2)(5), Boddy AM(2)(11), Yandell M(4), Gregg C(3), Schiffman 
JD(2)(12)(13), Abegglen LM(2)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)School of Informatics, Computing, and Cyber Systems, Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, AZ, USA.
(2)Arizona Cancer Evolution Center, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(3)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, 
UT, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(5)Center for Biocomputing, Security and Society, Biodesign Institute, Arizona 
State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, USA.
(7)Ringling Bros Center for Elephant Conservation, Polk City, FL, USA.
(8)William H. Darr College of Agriculture, Missouri State University, 
Springfield, MO, USA.
(9)Northwest ZooPath, Monroe, WA, USA.
(10)Department of Psychology, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(11)Department of Anthropology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA, 
USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics & Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(13)PEEL Therapeutics, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, USA & Haifa, Israel.

Disease susceptibility and resistance are important factors for the conservation 
of endangered species, including elephants. We analyzed pathology data from 26 
zoos and report that Asian elephants have increased neoplasia and malignancy 
prevalence compared with African bush elephants. This is consistent with 
observed higher susceptibility to tuberculosis and elephant endotheliotropic 
herpesvirus (EEHV) in Asian elephants. To investigate genetic mechanisms 
underlying disease resistance, including differential responses between species, 
among other elephant traits, we sequenced multiple elephant genomes. We report a 
draft assembly for an Asian elephant, and defined 862 and 1,017 conserved 
potential regulatory elements in Asian and African bush elephants, respectively. 
In the genomes of both elephant species, conserved elements were significantly 
enriched with genes differentially expressed between the species. In Asian 
elephants, these putative regulatory regions were involved in immunity pathways 
including tumor-necrosis factor, which plays an important role in EEHV response. 
Genomic sequences of African bush, forest, and Asian elephant genomes revealed 
extensive sequence conservation at TP53 retrogene loci across three species, 
which may be related to TP53 functionality in elephant cancer resistance. 
Positive selection scans revealed outlier genes related to additional elephant 
traits. Our study suggests that gene regulation plays an important role in the 
differential inflammatory response of Asian and African elephants, leading to 
increased infectious disease and cancer susceptibility in Asian elephants. These 
genomic discoveries can inform future functional and translational studies aimed 
at identifying effective treatment approaches for ill elephants, which may 
improve conservation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab127
PMCID: PMC8383897
PMID: 33944920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


915. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3925-3937. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab125.

Gene Duplication and Loss of AANAT in Mammals Driven by Rhythmic Adaptations.

Yin D(1), Zhou R(1), Yin M(1), Chen Y(1), Xu S(1), Yang G(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Biodiversity and Biotechnology, College of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.

Arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) plays a crucial role in synchronizing 
internal biological functions to circadian and circannual changes. Generally 
speaking, only one copy of AANAT gene has been found in mammals, however, three 
independent duplications of this gene were detected in several cetartiodactyl 
lineages (i.e., Suidae, Hippopotamidae, and Pecora), which originated in the 
middle Eocene, a geological period characterized with the increased climate 
seasonality. Lineage-specific expansions of AANAT and the associated functional 
enhancement in these lineages strongly suggest an improvement in regulating 
photoperiodic response to adapt to seasonal climate changes. In contrast, 
independent inactivating mutations or deletions of the AANAT locus were 
identified in the four pineal-deficient clades (cetaceans, sirenians, 
xenarthrans, and pangolins). Loss of AANAT function in cetaceans and sirenians 
could disrupt the sleep-promoting effects of pineal melatonin, which might 
contribute to increasing wakefulness, adapting these clades to underwater sleep. 
The absence of AANAT and pineal glands in xenarthrans and pangolins may be 
associated with their body temperature maintenance. The present work 
demonstrates a far more complex and intriguing evolutionary pattern and 
functional diversity of mammalian AANAT genes than previously thought and 
provides further evidence for understanding AANAT evolution as driven by 
rhythmic adaptations in mammals.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab125
PMCID: PMC8382898
PMID: 33944919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


916. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3046-3059. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab118.

An Evolutionary Portrait of the Progenitor SARS-CoV-2 and Its Dominant Offshoots 
in COVID-19 Pandemic.

Kumar S(1)(2)(3), Tao Q(1)(2), Weaver S(1)(2), Sanderford M(1)(2), 
Caraballo-Ortiz MA(1)(2), Sharma S(1)(2), Pond SLK(1)(2), Miura S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Excellence in Genome Medicine and Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2020 Sep 24;:

Global sequencing of genomes of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
(SARS-CoV-2) has continued to reveal new genetic variants that are the key to 
unraveling its early evolutionary history and tracking its global spread over 
time. Here we present the heretofore cryptic mutational history and 
spatiotemporal dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 from an analysis of thousands of 
high-quality genomes. We report the likely most recent common ancestor of 
SARS-CoV-2, reconstructed through a novel application and advancement of 
computational methods initially developed to infer the mutational history of 
tumor cells in a patient. This progenitor genome differs from genomes of the 
first coronaviruses sampled in China by three variants, implying that none of 
the earliest patients represent the index case or gave rise to all the human 
infections. However, multiple coronavirus infections in China and the United 
States harbored the progenitor genetic fingerprint in January 2020 and later, 
suggesting that the progenitor was spreading worldwide months before and after 
the first reported cases of COVID-19 in China. Mutations of the progenitor and 
its offshoots have produced many dominant coronavirus strains that have spread 
episodically over time. Fingerprinting based on common mutations reveals that 
the same coronavirus lineage has dominated North America for most of the 
pandemic in 2020. There have been multiple replacements of predominant 
coronavirus strains in Europe and Asia as well as continued presence of multiple 
high-frequency strains in Asia and North America. We have developed a 
continually updating dashboard of global evolution and spatiotemporal trends of 
SARS-CoV-2 spread (http://sars2evo.datamonkey.org/).

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab118
PMCID: PMC8135569
PMID: 33942847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


917. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3358-3372. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab108.

Brassica rapa Domestication: Untangling Wild and Feral Forms and Convergence of 
Crop Morphotypes.

McAlvay AC(1)(2), Ragsdale AP(3), Mabry ME(4)(5), Qi X(6), Bird KA(7), Velasco 
P(8), An H(4), Pires JC(4), Emshwiller E(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Economic Botany, New York Botanical Garden, The Bronx, New York, 
NY, USA.
(2)Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(3)McGill Genome Center and Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, 
Montreal, Canada; Unit of Advanced Genomics, LANGEBIO, Irapuato, Mexico.
(4)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.
(5)Florida Museum of Natural History, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, USA.
(7)Ecology, Evolutionary Biology, and Behavior and Department of Horticulture, 
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(8)Misión Biológica de Galicia, Pontevedra, Spain.

The study of domestication contributes to our knowledge of evolution and crop 
genetic resources. Human selection has shaped wild Brassica rapa into diverse 
turnip, leafy, and oilseed crops. Despite its worldwide economic importance and 
potential as a model for understanding diversification under domestication, 
insights into the number of domestication events and initial crop(s) 
domesticated in B. rapa have been limited due to a lack of clarity about the 
wild or feral status of conspecific noncrop relatives. To address this gap and 
reconstruct the domestication history of B. rapa, we analyzed 68,468 
genotyping-by-sequencing-derived single nucleotide polymorphisms for 416 samples 
in the largest diversity panel of domesticated and weedy B. rapa to date. To 
further understand the center of origin, we modeled the potential range of wild 
B. rapa during the mid-Holocene. Our analyses of genetic diversity across 
B. rapa morphotypes suggest that noncrop samples from the Caucasus, Siberia, and 
Italy may be truly wild, whereas those occurring in the Americas and much of 
Europe are feral. Clustering, tree-based analyses, and parameterized demographic 
inference further indicate that turnips were likely the first crop type 
domesticated, from which leafy types in East Asia and Europe were selected from 
distinct lineages. These findings clarify the domestication history and nature 
of wild crop genetic resources for B. rapa, which provides the first step toward 
investigating cases of possible parallel selection, the domestication and 
feralization syndrome, and novel germplasm for Brassica crop improvement.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab108
PMCID: PMC8321528
PMID: 33930151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


918. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4187-4204. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab123.

Conserved and unique transcriptional features of pharyngeal arches in the skate 
(Leucoraja erinacea) and evolution of the jaw.

Hirschberger C(1), Sleight VA(1)(2), Criswell KE(1), Clark SJ(3), Gillis 
JA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Babraham Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, MA, USA.

The origin of the jaw is a long-standing problem in vertebrate evolutionary 
biology. Classical hypotheses of serial homology propose that the upper and 
lower jaw evolved through modifications of dorsal and ventral gill arch skeletal 
elements, respectively. If the jaw and gill arches are derived members of a 
primitive branchial series, we predict that they would share common 
developmental patterning mechanisms. Using candidate and RNAseq/differential 
gene expression analyses, we find broad conservation of dorsoventral (DV) 
patterning mechanisms within the developing mandibular, hyoid, and gill arches 
of a cartilaginous fish, the skate (Leucoraja erinacea). Shared features include 
expression of genes encoding members of the ventralizing BMP and endothelin 
signaling pathways and their effectors, the joint markers nkx3.2 and gdf5 and 
prochondrogenic transcription factor barx1, and the dorsal territory marker 
pou3f3. Additionally, we find that mesenchymal expression of eya1/six1 is an 
ancestral feature of the mandibular arch of jawed vertebrates, whereas 
differences in notch signaling distinguish the mandibular and gill arches in 
skate. Comparative transcriptomic analyses of mandibular and gill arch tissues 
reveal additional genes differentially expressed along the DV axis of the 
pharyngeal arches, including scamp5 as a novel marker of the dorsal mandibular 
arch, as well as distinct transcriptional features of mandibular and gill arch 
muscle progenitors and developing gill buds. Taken together, our findings reveal 
conserved patterning mechanisms in the pharyngeal arches of jawed vertebrates, 
consistent with serial homology of their skeletal derivatives, as well as unique 
transcriptional features that may underpin distinct jaw and gill arch 
morphologies.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab123
PMCID: PMC8476176
PMID: 33905525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


919. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3459-3477. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab124.

Reconstructing the Human Genetic History of Mainland Southeast Asia: Insights 
from Genome-Wide Data from Thailand and Laos.

Kutanan W(1), Liu D(2), Kampuansai J(3)(4), Srikummool M(5), Srithawong S(1), 
Shoocongdej R(6), Sangkhano S(7), Ruangchai S(8), Pittayaporn P(9), Arias 
L(2)(10), Stoneking M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, 
Thailand.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 
Thailand.
(4)Research Center in Bioresources for Agriculture, Industry and Medicine, 
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Science, Naresuan University, 
Phitsanulok, Thailand.
(6)Department of Archaeology, Faculty of Archaeology, Silpakorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(7)School of Public Health, Walailak University, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Thailand.
(8)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, 
Thailand.
(9)Department of Linguistics and Southeast Asian Linguistics Research Unit, 
Faculty of Arts, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(10)Centre for Linguistics, Faculty of Humanities, Leiden University, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

Thailand and Laos, located in the center of Mainland Southeast Asia (MSEA), 
harbor diverse ethnolinguistic groups encompassing all five language families of 
MSEA: Tai-Kadai (TK), Austroasiatic (AA), Sino-Tibetan (ST), Hmong-Mien (HM), 
and Austronesian (AN). Previous genetic studies of Thai/Lao populations have 
focused almost exclusively on uniparental markers and there is a paucity of 
genome-wide studies. We therefore generated genome-wide SNP data for 33 
ethnolinguistic groups, belonging to the five MSEA language families from 
Thailand and Laos, and analyzed these together with data from modern Asian 
populations and SEA ancient samples. Overall, we find genetic structure 
according to language family, albeit with heterogeneity in the AA-, HM-, and 
ST-speaking groups, and in the hill tribes, that reflects both population 
interactions and genetic drift. For the TK speaking groups, we find localized 
genetic structure that is driven by different levels of interaction with other 
groups in the same geographic region. Several Thai groups exhibit admixture from 
South Asia, which we date to ∼600-1000 years ago, corresponding to a time of 
intensive international trade networks that had a major cultural impact on 
Thailand. An AN group from Southern Thailand shows both South Asian admixture as 
well as overall affinities with AA-speaking groups in the region, suggesting an 
impact of cultural diffusion. Overall, we provide the first detailed insights 
into the genetic profiles of Thai/Lao ethnolinguistic groups, which should be 
helpful for reconstructing human genetic history in MSEA and selecting 
populations for participation in ongoing whole genome sequence and biomedical 
studies.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab124
PMCID: PMC8321548
PMID: 33905512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


920. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3593-3605. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab122.

Role of Sex-Concordant Gene Expression in the Coevolution of Exaggerated Male 
and Female Genitalia in a Beetle Group.

Nomura S(1), Fujisawa T(1)(2), Sota T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(2)The Center for Data Science Education and Research, Shiga University, Hikone, 
Shiga, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 02;:

Some sexual traits, including genitalia, have undergone coevolutionary 
diversification toward exaggerated states in both sexes among closely related 
species, but the underlying genetic mechanisms that allow correlated character 
evolution between the sexes are poorly understood. Here, we studied 
interspecific differences in gene expression timing profiles involved in the 
correlated evolution of corresponding male and female genital parts in three 
species of ground beetle in Carabus (Ohomopterus). The male and female genital 
parts maintain morphological matching, whereas large interspecific variation in 
genital part size has occurred in the genital coevolution between the sexes 
toward exaggeration. We analyzed differences in gene expression involved in the 
interspecific differences in genital morphology using whole transcriptome data 
from genital tissues during genital morphogenesis. We found that the gene 
expression variance attributed to sex was negligible for the majority of 
differentially expressed genes, thus exhibiting sex-concordant expression, 
although large variances were attributed to stage and species differences. For 
each sex, we obtained co-expression gene networks and hub genes from 
differentially expressed genes between species that might be involved in 
interspecific differences in genital morphology. These gene networks were common 
to both sexes, and both sex-discordant and sex-concordant gene expression were 
likely involved in species-specific genital morphology. In particular, the gene 
expression related to exaggerated genital size showed no significant intersexual 
differences, implying that the genital sizes in both sexes are controlled by the 
same gene network with sex-concordant expression patterns, thereby facilitating 
the coevolution of exaggerated genitalia between the sexes while maintaining 
intersexual matching.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab122
PMCID: PMC8382896
PMID: 33905498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


921. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3567-3580. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab119.

Molecular Parallelism Underlies Convergent Highland Adaptation of Maize 
Landraces.

Wang L(1)(2)(3), Josephs EB(4)(5), Lee KM(3), Roberts LM(2), Rellán-Álvarez 
R(6)(7), Ross-Ibarra J(3)(8), Hufford MB(2).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Genomics 
Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen, 
China.
(2)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA, USA.
(3)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
CA, USA.
(4)The Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior Program, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
USA.
(6)Langebio, Irapuato, Gto., Mexico.
(7)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(8)Genome Center and Center for Population Biology, University of California, 
Davis, Davis, CA, USA.

Convergent phenotypic evolution provides some of the strongest evidence for 
adaptation. However, the extent to which recurrent phenotypic adaptation has 
arisen via parallelism at the molecular level remains unresolved, as does the 
evolutionary origin of alleles underlying such adaptation. Here, we investigate 
genetic mechanisms of convergent highland adaptation in maize landrace 
populations and evaluate the genetic sources of recurrently selected alleles. 
Population branch excess statistics reveal substantial evidence of parallel 
adaptation at the level of individual single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs), 
genes, and pathways in four independent highland maize populations. The majority 
of convergently selected SNPs originated via migration from a single population, 
most likely in the Mesoamerican highlands, while standing variation introduced 
by ancient gene flow was also a contributor. Polygenic adaptation analyses of 
quantitative traits reveal that alleles affecting flowering time are 
significantly associated with elevation, indicating the flowering time pathway 
was targeted by highland adaptation. In addition, repeatedly selected genes were 
significantly enriched in the flowering time pathway, indicating their 
significance in adapting to highland conditions. Overall, our study system 
represents a promising model to study convergent evolution in plants with 
potential applications to crop adaptation across environmental gradients.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab119
PMCID: PMC8382895
PMID: 33905497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


922. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3373-3382. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab109.

ABO Genetic Variation in Neanderthals and Denisovans.

Villanea FA(1)(2), Huerta-Sanchez E(2), Fox K(3).

Author information:
(1)Anthropology, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.
(2)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(3)Anthropology and Global Health, University of California San Diego, San 
Diego, CA, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5835.

Variation at the ABO locus was one of the earliest sources of data in the study 
of human population identity and history, and to this day remains widely 
genotyped due to its importance in blood and tissue transfusions. Here, we look 
at ABO blood type variants in our archaic relatives: Neanderthals and 
Denisovans. Our goal is to understand the genetic landscape of the ABO gene in 
archaic humans, and how it relates to modern human ABO variation. We found two 
Neanderthal variants of the O allele in the Siberian Neanderthals (O1 and O2), 
one of these variants is shared with an European Neanderthal, who is a 
heterozygote for this O1 variant and a rare cis-AB variant. The Denisovan 
individual is heterozygous for two variants of the O1 allele, functionally 
similar to variants found widely in modern humans. Perhaps more surprisingly, 
the O2 allele variant found in Siberian Neanderthals can be found at low 
frequencies in modern Europeans and Southeast Asians, and the O1 allele variant 
found in Siberian and European Neanderthal is also found at very low frequency 
in modern East Asians. Our genetic distance analyses suggest both alleles 
survive in modern humans due to inbreeding with Neanderthals. We find that the 
sequence backgrounds of the surviving Neanderthal-like O alleles in modern 
humans retain a higher sequence divergence than other surviving Neanderthal 
genome fragments, supporting a view of balancing selection operating in the 
Neanderthal ABO alleles by retaining highly diverse haplotypes compared with 
portions of the genome evolving neutrally.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab109
PMCID: PMC8321519
PMID: 33892510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


923. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3556-3566. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab117.

Genetic Architecture Underlying Nascent Speciation-The Evolution of Eurasian 
Pigs under Domestication.

Xie HB(1), Wang LG(2), Fan CY(3), Zhang LC(2), Adeola AC(1), Yin X(3), Zeng 
ZB(4), Wang LX(2), Zhang YP(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Yunnan Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology of Domestic Animals, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-resource in 
Yunnan, School of Life Science, Yunnan University, Kunming, China.
(4)Bioinformatics Research Center, Department of Horticultural Science, North 
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(5)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Speciation is a process whereby the evolution of reproductive barriers leads to 
isolated species. Although many studies have addressed large-effect genetic 
footprints in the advanced stages of speciation, the genetics of reproductive 
isolation in nascent stage of speciation remains unclear. Here, we show that pig 
domestication offers an interesting model for studying the early stages of 
speciation in great details. Pig breeds have not evolved the large X-effect of 
hybrid incompatibility commonly observed between "good species." Instead, 
deleterious epistatic interactions among multiple autosomal loci are common. 
These weak Dobzhansky-Muller incompatibilities confer partial hybrid inviability 
with sex biases in crosses between European and East Asian domestic pigs. The 
genomic incompatibility is enriched in pathways for angiogenesis, androgen 
receptor signaling and immunity, with an observation of many highly 
differentiated cis-regulatory variants. Our study suggests that partial hybrid 
inviability caused by pervasive but weak interactions among autosomal loci may 
be a hallmark of nascent speciation in mammals.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab117
PMCID: PMC8382894
PMID: 33892509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


924. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3022-3027. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab120.

MEGA11: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis Version 11.

Tamura K(1)(2), Stecher G(3), Kumar S(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Research Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Tokyo Metropolitan 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Center for Excellence in Genome Medicine and Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

The Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software has matured to 
contain a large collection of methods and tools of computational molecular 
evolution. Here, we describe new additions that make MEGA a more comprehensive 
tool for building timetrees of species, pathogens, and gene families using rapid 
relaxed-clock methods. Methods for estimating divergence times and confidence 
intervals are implemented to use probability densities for calibration 
constraints for node-dating and sequence sampling dates for tip-dating analyses. 
They are supported by new options for tagging sequences with spatiotemporal 
sampling information, an expanded interactive Node Calibrations Editor, and an 
extended Tree Explorer to display timetrees. Also added is a Bayesian method for 
estimating neutral evolutionary probabilities of alleles in a species using 
multispecies sequence alignments and a machine learning method to test for the 
autocorrelation of evolutionary rates in phylogenies. The computer memory 
requirements for the maximum likelihood analysis are reduced significantly 
through reprogramming, and the graphical user interface has been made more 
responsive and interactive for very big data sets. These enhancements will 
improve the user experience, quality of results, and the pace of biological 
discovery. Natively compiled graphical user interface and command-line versions 
of MEGA11 are available for Microsoft Windows, Linux, and macOS from 
www.megasoftware.net.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab120
PMCID: PMC8233496
PMID: 33892491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


925. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3581-3592. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab121.

Asexuality Associated with Marked Genomic Expansion of Tandemly Repeated rRNA 
and Histone Genes.

McElroy KE(1)(2), Müller S(3), Lamatsch DK(4), Bankers L(5), Fields PD(6), 
Jalinsky JR(2), Sharbrough J(7)(8), Boore JL(9), Logsdon JM(2), Neiman M(2)(10).

Author information:
(1)Ecology, Evolutionary, and Organismal Biology, Iowa State University, Ames, 
IA, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, Munich University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians 
University, Munich, Germany.
(4)Research Department for Limnology, University of Innsbruck, Mondsee, Mondsee, 
Austria.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Colorado-Anschutz Medical 
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Department of Environmental Sciences, Zoology, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(7)Biology Department, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology, Socorro, 
NM, USA.
(8)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(9)Providence St. Joseph Health and Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(10)Department of Gender, Women's, and Sexuality Studies, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA, USA.

How does asexual reproduction influence genome evolution? Although is it clear 
that genomic structural variation is common and important in natural 
populations, we know very little about how one of the most fundamental of 
eukaryotic traits-mode of genomic inheritance-influences genome structure. We 
address this question with the New Zealand freshwater snail Potamopyrgus 
antipodarum, which features multiple separately derived obligately asexual 
lineages that coexist and compete with otherwise similar sexual lineages. We 
used whole-genome sequencing reads from a diverse set of sexual and asexual 
individuals to analyze genomic abundance of a critically important gene family, 
rDNA (the genes encoding rRNAs), that is notable for dynamic and variable copy 
number. Our genomic survey of rDNA in P. antipodarum revealed two striking 
results. First, the core histone and 5S rRNA genes occur between tandem copies 
of the 18S-5.8S-28S gene cluster, a unique architecture for these crucial gene 
families. Second, asexual P. antipodarum harbor dramatically more rDNA-histone 
copies than sexuals, which we validated through molecular and cytogenetic 
analysis. The repeated expansion of this genomic region in asexual 
P. antipodarum lineages following distinct transitions to asexuality represents 
a dramatic genome structural change associated with asexual reproduction-with 
potential functional consequences related to the loss of sexual reproduction.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab121
PMCID: PMC8382920
PMID: 33885820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


926. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3445-3458. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab115.

A Case of Gene Fragmentation in Plant Mitochondria Fixed by the Selection of a 
Compensatory Restorer of Fertility-Like PPR Gene.

Nguyen TT(1), Planchard N(1)(2), Dahan J(1), Arnal N(1), Balzergue S(3), Benamar 
A(3), Bertin P(4), Brunaud V(5), Dargel-Graffin C(1), Macherel D(3), 
Martin-Magniette ML(5), Quadrado M(1), Namy O(4), Mireau H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Jean-Pierre Bourgin (IJPB), INRAE, AgroParisTech, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Versailles, France.
(2)Paris-Sud University, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France.
(3)Unité Mixte de Recherche 1345, Institut de Recherche en Horticulture et 
Semences, Université d'Angers, Angers, France.
(4)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(5)Institute of Plant Sciences Paris-Saclay (IPS2), Université Paris-Saclay, 
CNRS, INRAE, University of Evry, Orsay, France.

The high mutational load of mitochondrial genomes combined with their 
uniparental inheritance and high polyploidy favors the maintenance of 
deleterious mutations within populations. How cells compose and adapt to the 
accumulation of disadvantageous mitochondrial alleles remains unclear. Most 
harmful changes are likely corrected by purifying selection, however, the 
intimate collaboration between mitochondria- and nuclear-encoded gene products 
offers theoretical potential for compensatory adaptive changes. In plants, 
cytoplasmic male sterilities are known examples of nucleo-mitochondrial 
coadaptation situations in which nuclear-encoded restorer of fertility (Rf) 
genes evolve to counteract the effect of mitochondria-encoded cytoplasmic male 
sterility (CMS) genes and restore fertility. Most cloned Rfs belong to a small 
monophyletic group, comprising 26 pentatricopeptide repeat genes in Arabidopsis, 
called Rf-like (RFL). In this analysis, we explored the functional diversity of 
RFL genes in Arabidopsis and found that the RFL8 gene is not related to CMS 
suppression but essential for plant embryo development. In vitro-rescued rfl8 
plantlets are deficient in the production of the mitochondrial heme-lyase 
complex. A complete ensemble of molecular and genetic analyses allowed us to 
demonstrate that the RFL8 gene has been selected to permit the translation of 
the mitochondrial ccmFN2 gene encoding a heme-lyase complex subunit which 
derives from the split of the ccmFN gene, specifically in Brassicaceae plants. 
This study represents thus a clear case of nuclear compensation to a 
lineage-specific mitochondrial genomic rearrangement in plants and demonstrates 
that RFL genes can be selected in response to other mitochondrial deviancies 
than CMS suppression.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab115
PMCID: PMC8321540
PMID: 33878189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


927. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3415-3435. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab112.

Conservation of Aging and Cancer Epigenetic Signatures across Human and Mouse.

Pérez RF(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Tejedor JR(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Santamarina-Ojeda 
P(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Martínez VL(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Urdinguio RG(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), 
Villamañán L(6), Candiota AP(6)(7), Sarró NMV(8), Barradas M(9), 
Fernandez-Marcos PJ(9), Serrano M(10)(11)(12), Fernández AF(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), 
Fraga MF(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Nanomedicine Laboratory, Nanomaterials and 
Nanotechnology Research Center (CINN-CSIC), University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.
(2)Institute of Oncology of Asturias (IUOPA), University of Oviedo, Oviedo, 
Spain.
(3)Health Research Institute of Asturias (ISPA), University of Oviedo, Oviedo, 
Spain.
(4)Department of Organisms and Systems Biology (B.O.S.), University of Oviedo, 
Oviedo, Spain.
(5)Rare Diseases CIBER (CIBERER) of the Carlos III Health Institute (ISCIII), 
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Unitat de Bioquímica de Biociències, Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia 
Molecular, Edifici Cs, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, 
Spain.
(7)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y 
Nanomedicina (CIBER-BBN), Madrid, Spain.
(8)Servicio Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge-IDIBELL, 
Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
(9)Metabolic Syndrome Group-BIOPROMET, Madrid Institute for Advanced 
Studies-IMDEA Food, CEI UAM+CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Tumour Suppression Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), 
Madrid, Spain.
(11)Cellular Plasticity and Disease Group, Institute for Research in Biomedicine 
(IRB Barcelona), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Catalan Institution for Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Spain.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Dec 9;38(12):5836.

Aging and cancer are two interrelated processes, with aging being a major risk 
factor for the development of cancer. Parallel epigenetic alterations have been 
described for both, although differences, especially within the DNA 
hypomethylation scenario, have also been recently reported. Although many of 
these observations arise from the use of mouse models, there is a lack of 
systematic comparisons of human and mouse epigenetic patterns in the context of 
disease. However, such comparisons are significant as they allow to establish 
the extent to which some of the observed similarities or differences arise from 
pre-existing species-specific epigenetic traits. Here, we have used reduced 
representation bisulfite sequencing to profile the brain methylomes of young and 
old, tumoral and nontumoral brain samples from human and mouse. We first 
characterized the baseline epigenomic patterns of the species and subsequently 
focused on the DNA methylation alterations associated with cancer and aging. 
Next, we described the functional genomic and epigenomic context associated with 
the alterations, and finally, we integrated our data to study interspecies DNA 
methylation levels at orthologous CpG sites. Globally, we found considerable 
differences between the characteristics of DNA methylation alterations in cancer 
and aging in both species. Moreover, we describe robust evidence for the 
conservation of the specific cancer and aging epigenomic signatures in human and 
mouse. Our observations point toward the preservation of the functional 
consequences of these alterations at multiple levels of genomic regulation. 
Finally, our analyses reveal a role for the genomic context in explaining 
disease- and species-specific epigenetic traits.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab112
PMCID: PMC8321527
PMID: 33871658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


928. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3345-3357. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab107.

Population Bottlenecks Strongly Affect the Evolutionary Dynamics of Antibiotic 
Persistence.

Windels EM(1)(2), Fox R(3), Yerramsetty K(3), Krouse K(3), Wenseleers T(4), 
Swinnen J(2), Matthay P(1)(2), Verstraete L(1)(2), Wilmaerts D(1)(2), Van den 
Bergh B(1)(2), Michiels J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)VIB Center for Microbiology, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(2)Centre of Microbial and Plant Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Inscripta, Boulder, CO, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Socioecology and Social Evolution, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Bacterial persistence is a potential cause of antibiotic therapy failure. 
Antibiotic-tolerant persisters originate from phenotypic differentiation within 
a susceptible population, occurring with a frequency that can be altered by 
mutations. Recent studies have proven that persistence is a highly evolvable 
trait and, consequently, an important evolutionary strategy of bacterial 
populations to adapt to high-dose antibiotic therapy. Yet, the factors that 
govern the evolutionary dynamics of persistence are currently poorly understood. 
Theoretical studies predict far-reaching effects of bottlenecking on the 
evolutionary adaption of bacterial populations, but these effects have never 
been investigated in the context of persistence. Bottlenecking events are 
frequently encountered by infecting pathogens during host-to-host transmission 
and antibiotic treatment. In this study, we used a combination of experimental 
evolution and barcoded knockout libraries to examine how population 
bottlenecking affects the evolutionary dynamics of persistence. In accordance 
with existing hypotheses, small bottlenecks were found to restrict the adaptive 
potential of populations and result in more heterogeneous evolutionary outcomes. 
Evolutionary trajectories followed in small-bottlenecking regimes additionally 
suggest that the fitness landscape associated with persistence has a rugged 
topography, with distinct trajectories toward increased persistence that are 
accessible to evolving populations. Furthermore, sequencing data of evolved 
populations and knockout libraries after selection reveal various genes that are 
potentially involved in persistence, including previously known as well as novel 
targets. Together, our results do not only provide experimental evidence for 
evolutionary theories, but also contribute to a better understanding of the 
environmental and genetic factors that guide bacterial adaptation to antibiotic 
treatment.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab107
PMCID: PMC8321523
PMID: 33871643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


929. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3397-3414. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab111.

Predictive Models of Genetic Redundancy in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Cusack SA(1), Wang P(2), Lotreck SG(2)(3), Moore BM(4), Meng F(2), Conner 
JK(2)(5)(6), Krysan PJ(7), Lehti-Shiu MD(2), Shiu SH(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
MI, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
USA.
(3)Department of Computational Mathematics, Science and Engineering, Michigan 
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Botany, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(5)Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior Program, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA.
(6)Kellogg Biological Station, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(7)Department of Horticulture, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 
USA.

Genetic redundancy refers to a situation where an individual with a 
loss-of-function mutation in one gene (single mutant) does not show an apparent 
phenotype until one or more paralogs are also knocked out (double/higher-order 
mutant). Previous studies have identified some characteristics common among 
redundant gene pairs, but a predictive model of genetic redundancy incorporating 
a wide variety of features derived from accumulating omics and mutant phenotype 
data is yet to be established. In addition, the relative importance of these 
features for genetic redundancy remains largely unclear. Here, we establish 
machine learning models for predicting whether a gene pair is likely redundant 
or not in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana based on six feature categories: 
functional annotations, evolutionary conservation including duplication patterns 
and mechanisms, epigenetic marks, protein properties including posttranslational 
modifications, gene expression, and gene network properties. The definition of 
redundancy, data transformations, feature subsets, and machine learning 
algorithms used significantly affected model performance based on holdout, 
testing phenotype data. Among the most important features in predicting gene 
pairs as redundant were having a paralog(s) from recent duplication events, 
annotation as a transcription factor, downregulation during stress conditions, 
and having similar expression patterns under stress conditions. We also explored 
the potential reasons underlying mispredictions and limitations of our studies. 
This genetic redundancy model sheds light on characteristics that may contribute 
to long-term maintenance of paralogs, and will ultimately allow for more 
targeted generation of functionally informative double mutants, advancing 
functional genomic studies.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab111
PMCID: PMC8321531
PMID: 33871641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


930. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3436-3444. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab114.

Kinetic Analysis Suggests Evolution of Ribosome Specificity in Modern Elongation 
Factor-Tus from "Generalist" Ancestors.

De Tarafder A(1), Parajuli NP(1), Majumdar S(1), Kaçar B(2)(3), Sanyal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA.
(3)Lunar and Planetary Laboratory and Steward Observatory University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, USA.

It has been hypothesized that early enzymes are more promiscuous than their 
extant orthologs. Whether or not this hypothesis applies to the translation 
machinery, the oldest molecular machine of life, is not known. Efficient protein 
synthesis relies on a cascade of specific interactions between the ribosome and 
the translation factors. Here, using elongation factor-Tu (EF-Tu) as a model 
system, we have explored the evolution of ribosome specificity in translation 
factors. Employing presteady state fast kinetics using quench flow, we have 
quantitatively characterized the specificity of two sequence-reconstructed 1.3- 
to 3.3-Gy-old ancestral EF-Tus toward two unrelated bacterial ribosomes, 
mesophilic Escherichia coli and thermophilic Thermus thermophilus. Although the 
modern EF-Tus show clear preference for their respective ribosomes, the 
ancestral EF-Tus show similar specificity for diverse ribosomes. In addition, 
despite increase in the catalytic activity with temperature, the ribosome 
specificity of the thermophilic EF-Tus remains virtually unchanged. Our kinetic 
analysis thus suggests that EF-Tu proteins likely evolved from the catalytically 
promiscuous, "generalist" ancestors. Furthermore, compatibility of diverse 
ribosomes with the modern and ancestral EF-Tus suggests that the ribosomal core 
probably evolved before the diversification of the EF-Tus. This study thus 
provides important insights regarding the evolution of modern translation 
machinery.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab114
PMCID: PMC8321524
PMID: 33871630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


931. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3308-3331. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab105.

Evolution after Whole-Genome Duplication: Teleost MicroRNAs.

Desvignes T(1), Sydes J(1), Montfort J(2), Bobe J(2), Postlethwait JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.
(2)INRAE, LPGP, Rennes, France.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important gene expression regulators implicated in many 
biological processes, but we lack a global understanding of how miRNA genes 
evolve and contribute to developmental canalization and phenotypic 
diversification. Whole-genome duplication events likely provide a substrate for 
species divergence and phenotypic change by increasing gene numbers and relaxing 
evolutionary pressures. To understand the consequences of genome duplication on 
miRNA evolution, we studied miRNA genes following the teleost genome duplication 
(TGD). Analysis of miRNA genes in four teleosts and in spotted gar, whose 
lineage diverged before the TGD, revealed that miRNA genes were retained in 
ohnologous pairs more frequently than protein-coding genes, and that gene losses 
occurred rapidly after the TGD. Genomic context influenced retention rates, with 
clustered miRNA genes retained more often than nonclustered miRNA genes and 
intergenic miRNA genes retained more frequently than intragenic miRNA genes, 
which often shared the evolutionary fate of their protein-coding host. 
Expression analyses revealed both conserved and divergent expression patterns 
across species in line with miRNA functions in phenotypic canalization and 
diversification, respectively. Finally, major strands of miRNA genes experienced 
stronger purifying selection, especially in their seeds and 3'-complementary 
regions, compared with minor strands, which nonetheless also displayed 
evolutionary features compatible with constrained function. This study provides 
the first genome-wide, multispecies analysis of the mechanisms influencing 
metazoan miRNA evolution after whole-genome duplication.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab105
PMCID: PMC8321539
PMID: 33871629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


932. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3383-3396. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab110.

Genomic Basis of Striking Fin Shapes and Colors in the Fighting Fish.

Wang L(1), Sun F(1), Wan ZY(1), Ye B(1), Wen Y(1), Liu H(1), Yang Z(1), Pang 
H(1), Meng Z(2), Fan B(3), Alfiko Y(4), Shen Y(5), Bai B(1), Lee MSQ(1), 
Piferrer F(6), Schartl M(7)(8), Meyer A(9), Yue GH(1)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Population Genetics & Breeding Group, Temasek Life Sciences 
Laboratory, Singapore, Singapore.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Food and Environmental Engineering, Yangjiang Polytechnic, 
Yangjiang, China.
(4)Biotech Lab, Wilmar International, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(5)Key Laboratory of Exploration and Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources, 
Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Institute of Marine Sciences (ICM), Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Developmental Biochemistry, Biocenter, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, 
Germany.
(8)The Xiphophorus Genetic Stock Center, Department of Chemistry and 
Biochemistry, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, USA.
(9)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(11)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 
Singapore.

Resolving the genomic basis underlying phenotypic variations is a question of 
great importance in evolutionary biology. However, understanding how genotypes 
determine the phenotypes is still challenging. Centuries of artificial selective 
breeding for beauty and aggression resulted in a plethora of colors, long-fin 
varieties, and hyper-aggressive behavior in the air-breathing Siamese fighting 
fish (Betta splendens), supplying an excellent system for studying the genomic 
basis of phenotypic variations. Combining whole-genome sequencing, quantitative 
trait loci mapping, genome-wide association studies, and genome editing, we 
investigated the genomic basis of huge morphological variation in fins and 
striking differences in coloration in the fighting fish. Results revealed that 
the double tail, elephant ear, albino, and fin spot mutants each were determined 
by single major-effect loci. The elephant ear phenotype was likely related to 
differential expression of a potassium ion channel gene, kcnh8. The albinotic 
phenotype was likely linked to a cis-regulatory element acting on the mitfa gene 
and the double-tail mutant was suggested to be caused by a deletion in a 
zic1/zic4 coenhancer. Our data highlight that major loci and cis-regulatory 
elements play important roles in bringing about phenotypic innovations and 
establish Bettas as new powerful model to study the genomic basis of evolved 
changes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab110
PMCID: PMC8321530
PMID: 33871625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


933. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3294-3307. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab104.

Transcriptome Analysis in Yeast Reveals the Externality of Position Effects.

Gui Q(1), Deng S(1), Zhou Z(1), Cao W(1), Zhang X(1), Shi W(1), Cai X(1), Jiang 
W(1), Cui Z(2), Hu Z(2), Chen X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Precision Medicine Institute, First 
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

The activity of a gene newly integrated into a chromosome depends on the genomic 
context of the integration site. This "position effect" has been widely 
reported, although the other side of the coin, that is, how integration affects 
the local chromosomal environment, has remained largely unexplored, as have the 
mechanism and phenotypic consequences of this "externality" of the position 
effect. Here, we examined the transcriptome profiles of approximately 250 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains, each with GFP integrated into a different 
locus of the wild-type strain. We found that in genomic regions enriched in 
essential genes, GFP expression tended to be lower, and the genes near the 
integration site tended to show greater expression reduction. Further joint 
analysis with public genome-wide histone modification profiles indicated that 
this effect was associated with H3K4me2. More importantly, we found that changes 
in the expression of neighboring genes, but not GFP expression, significantly 
altered the cellular growth rate. As a result, genomic loci that showed high GFP 
expression immediately after integration were associated with growth 
disadvantages caused by elevated expression of neighboring genes, ultimately 
leading to a low total yield of GFP in the long run. Our results were consistent 
with competition for transcriptional resources among neighboring genes and 
revealed a previously unappreciated facet of position effects. This study 
highlights the impact of position effects on the fate of exogenous gene 
integration and has significant implications for biological engineering and the 
pathology of viral integration into the host genome.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab104
PMCID: PMC8321525
PMID: 33871622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


934. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3543-3555. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab103.

The Evolution of Calcification in Reef-Building Corals.

Wang X(1), Zoccola D(2), Liew YJ(1), Tambutte E(2), Cui G(1), Allemand D(2), 
Tambutte S(2), Aranda M(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological and Environmental Sciences & Engineering Division (BESE), King 
Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Red Sea Research Center 
(RSRC), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Marine Biology Department, Centre Scientifique de Monaco, Monaco, Monaco.

Corals build the structural foundation of coral reefs, one of the most diverse 
and productive ecosystems on our planet. Although the process of coral 
calcification that allows corals to build these immense structures has been 
extensively investigated, we still know little about the evolutionary processes 
that allowed the soft-bodied ancestor of corals to become the ecosystem builders 
they are today. Using a combination of phylogenomics, proteomics, and 
immunohistochemistry, we show that scleractinian corals likely acquired the 
ability to calcify sometime between ∼308 and ∼265 Ma through a combination of 
lineage-specific gene duplications and the co-option of existing genes to the 
calcification process. Our results suggest that coral calcification did not 
require extensive evolutionary changes, but rather few coral-specific gene 
duplications and a series of small, gradual optimizations of ancestral proteins 
and their co-option to the calcification process.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab103
PMCID: PMC8382919
PMID: 33871620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


935. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3332-3344. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab106.

Large-Scale Phylogenomic Analyses Reveal the Monophyly of Bryophytes and 
Neoproterozoic Origin of Land Plants.

Su D(1), Yang L(1), Shi X(1), Ma X(1), Zhou X(2), Hedges SB(3), Zhong B(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Microbial Signals and Disease Control, 
Integrative Microbiology Research Centre, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Center for Biodiversity, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The relationships among the four major embryophyte lineages (mosses, liverworts, 
hornworts, vascular plants) and the timing of the origin of land plants are 
enigmatic problems in plant evolution. Here, we resolve the monophyly of 
bryophytes by improving taxon sampling of hornworts and eliminating the effect 
of synonymous substitutions. We then estimate the divergence time of crown 
embryophytes based on three fossil calibration strategies, and reveal that 
maximum calibration constraints have a major effect on estimating the time of 
origin of land plants. Moreover, comparison of priors and posteriors provides a 
guide for evaluating the optimal calibration strategy. By considering the 
reliability of fossil calibrations and the influences of molecular data, we 
estimate that land plants originated in the Precambrian (980-682 Ma), much older 
than widely recognized. Our study highlights the important contribution of 
molecular data when faced with contentious fossil evidence, and that fossil 
calibrations used in estimating the timescale of plant evolution require 
critical scrutiny.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab106
PMCID: PMC8321542
PMID: 33871608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


936. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3267-3278. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab101.

Unearthing LTR Retrotransposon gag Genes Co-opted in the Deep Evolution of 
Eukaryotes.

Wang J(1), Han GZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, College of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

LTR retrotransposons comprise a major component of the genomes of eukaryotes. On 
occasion, retrotransposon genes can be recruited by their hosts for diverse 
functions, a process formally referred to as co-option. However, a comprehensive 
picture of LTR retrotransposon gag gene co-option in eukaryotes is still 
lacking, with several documented cases exclusively involving Ty3/Gypsy 
retrotransposons in animals. Here, we use a phylogenomic approach to 
systemically unearth co-option of retrotransposon gag genes above the family 
level of taxonomy in 2,011 eukaryotes, namely co-option occurring during the 
deep evolution of eukaryotes. We identify a total of 14 independent gag gene 
co-option events across more than 740 eukaryote families, eight of which have 
not been reported previously. Among these retrotransposon gag gene co-option 
events, nine, four, and one involve gag genes of Ty3/Gypsy, Ty1/Copia, and 
Bel-Pao retrotransposons, respectively. Seven, four, and three co-option events 
occurred in animals, plants, and fungi, respectively. Interestingly, two 
co-option events took place in the early evolution of angiosperms. Both 
selective pressure and gene expression analyses further support that these 
co-opted gag genes might perform diverse cellular functions in their hosts, and 
several co-opted gag genes might be subject to positive selection. Taken 
together, our results provide a comprehensive picture of LTR retrotransposon gag 
gene co-option events that occurred during the deep evolution of eukaryotes and 
suggest paucity of LTR retrotransposon gag gene co-option during the deep 
evolution of eukaryotes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab101
PMCID: PMC8321522
PMID: 33871607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


937. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3279-3293. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab102.

Reverse Plasticity Underlies Rapid Evolution by Clonal Selection within 
Populations of Fibroblasts Propagated on a Novel Soft Substrate.

Purkayastha P(1), Pendyala K(2), Saxena AS(3), Hakimjavadi H(4), Chamala S(4), 
Dixit P(4)(5), Baer CF(3)(4), Lele TP(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(4)University of Florida Genetics Institute, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Physics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(6)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Texas A&M University, Houston, 
TX, USA.

Mechanical properties such as substrate stiffness are a ubiquitous feature of a 
cell's environment. Many types of animal cells exhibit canonical phenotypic 
plasticity when grown on substrates of differing stiffness, in vitro and in 
vivo. Whether such plasticity is a multivariate optimum due to hundreds of 
millions of years of animal evolution, or instead is a compromise between 
conflicting selective demands, is unknown. We addressed these questions by means 
of experimental evolution of populations of mouse fibroblasts propagated for 
approximately 90 cell generations on soft or stiff substrates. The ancestral 
cells grow twice as fast on stiff substrate as on soft substrate and exhibit the 
canonical phenotypic plasticity. Soft-selected lines derived from a genetically 
diverse ancestral population increased growth rate on soft substrate to the 
ancestral level on stiff substrate and evolved the same multivariate phenotype. 
The pattern of plasticity in the soft-selected lines was opposite of the 
ancestral pattern, suggesting that reverse plasticity underlies the observed 
rapid evolution. Conversely, growth rate and phenotypes did not change in 
selected lines derived from clonal cells. Overall, our results suggest that the 
changes were the result of genetic evolution and not phenotypic plasticity per 
se. Whole-transcriptome analysis revealed consistent differentiation between 
ancestral and soft-selected populations, and that both emergent phenotypes and 
gene expression tended to revert in the soft-selected lines. However, the 
selected populations appear to have achieved the same phenotypic outcome by 
means of at least two distinct transcriptional architectures related to 
mechanotransduction and proliferation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab102
PMCID: PMC8321517
PMID: 33871606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


938. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3247-3266. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab099.

Inferring Adaptive Codon Preference to Understand Sources of Selection Shaping 
Codon Usage Bias.

de Oliveira JL(1)(2), Morales AC(2), Hurst LD(2), Urrutia AO(2)(3), Thompson 
CRL(4), Wolf JB(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biologia, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, 
40170-115, Brazil.
(2)Milner Centre for Evolution and Department of Biology and Biochemistry, 
University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK.
(3)Instituto de Ecologia, UNAM, Ciudad de Mexico 04510, Mexico.
(4)Centre for Life's Origins and Evolution, Department of Genetics, Evolution 
and Environment, University College London, Darwin Building, Gower Street, 
London, WC1E 6BT, UK.

Alternative synonymous codons are often used at unequal frequencies. 
Classically, studies of such codon usage bias (CUB) attempted to separate the 
impact of neutral from selective forces by assuming that deviations from a 
predicted neutral equilibrium capture selection. However, GC-biased gene 
conversion (gBGC) can also cause deviation from a neutral null. Alternatively, 
selection has been inferred from CUB in highly expressed genes, but the accuracy 
of this approach has not been extensively tested, and gBGC can interfere with 
such extrapolations (e.g., if expression and gene conversion rates covary). It 
is therefore critical to examine deviations from a mutational null in a species 
with no gBGC. To achieve this goal, we implement such an analysis in the highly 
AT rich genome of Dictyostelium discoideum, where we find no evidence of gBGC. 
We infer neutral CUB under mutational equilibrium to quantify "adaptive codon 
preference," a nontautologous genome wide quantitative measure of the relative 
selection strength driving CUB. We observe signatures of purifying selection 
consistent with selection favoring adaptive codon preference. Preferred codons 
are not GC rich, underscoring the independence from gBGC. Expression-associated 
"preference" largely matches adaptive codon preference but does not wholly 
capture the influence of selection shaping patterns across all genes, suggesting 
selective constraints associated specifically with high expression. We observe 
patterns consistent with effects on mRNA translation and stability shaping 
adaptive codon preference. Thus, our approach to quantifying adaptive codon 
preference provides a framework for inferring the sources of selection that 
shape CUB across different contexts within the genome.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab099
PMCID: PMC8321536
PMID: 33871580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


939. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2675. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab082.

Erratum: Causes and Consequences of Bacteriophage Diversification via Genetic 
Exchanges across Lifestyles and Bacterial Taxa.

Moura de Sousa JA, Pfeifer E, Touchon M, Rocha EPC.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2497-2512.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab082
PMCID: PMC8136495
PMID: 33846748


940. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2674. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab076.

Erratum to: A Two-Locus System with Strong Epistasis Underlies Rapid 
Parasite-Mediated Evolution of Host Resistance.

Ameline C, Bourgeois Y, Vögtli F, Savola E, Andras J, Engelstädter J, Ebert D.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1512-1528.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab076
PMCID: PMC8136482
PMID: 33846744


941. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3170-3187. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab090.

Vestiges of the Bacterial Signal Recognition Particle-Based Protein Targeting in 
Mitochondria.

Pyrih J(1)(2), Pánek T(3)(4), Durante IM(1), Rašková V(1)(5), Cimrhanzlová 
K(1)(5), Kriegová E(1), Tsaousis AD(2), Eliáš M(3), Lukeš J(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České 
Budějovice (Budweis), Czech Republic.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular and Evolutionary Parasitology, RAPID Group, School of 
Biosciences, University of Kent, Canterbury, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(5)Faculty of Sciences, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice (Budweis), 
Czech Republic.

The main bacterial pathway for inserting proteins into the plasma membrane 
relies on the signal recognition particle (SRP), composed of the Ffh protein and 
an associated RNA component, and the SRP-docking protein FtsY. Eukaryotes use an 
equivalent system of archaeal origin to deliver proteins into the endoplasmic 
reticulum, whereas a bacteria-derived SRP and FtsY function in the plastid. Here 
we report on the presence of homologs of the bacterial Ffh and FtsY proteins in 
various unrelated plastid-lacking unicellular eukaryotes, namely Heterolobosea, 
Alveida, Goniomonas, and Hemimastigophora. The monophyly of novel eukaryotic Ffh 
and FtsY groups, predicted mitochondrial localization experimentally confirmed 
for Naegleria gruberi, and a strong alphaproteobacterial affinity of the Ffh 
group, collectively suggest that they constitute parts of an ancestral 
mitochondrial signal peptide-based protein-targeting system inherited from the 
last eukaryotic common ancestor, but lost from the majority of extant 
eukaryotes. The ability of putative signal peptides, predicted in a subset of 
mitochondrial-encoded N. gruberi proteins, to target a reporter fluorescent 
protein into the endoplasmic reticulum of Trypanosoma brucei, likely through 
their interaction with the cytosolic SRP, provided further support for this 
notion. We also illustrate that known mitochondrial ribosome-interacting 
proteins implicated in membrane protein targeting in opisthokonts (Mba1, Mdm38, 
and Mrx15) are broadly conserved in eukaryotes and nonredundant with the 
mitochondrial SRP system. Finally, we identified a novel mitochondrial protein 
(MAP67) present in diverse eukaryotes and related to the signal peptide-binding 
domain of Ffh, which may well be a hitherto unrecognized component of the 
mitochondrial membrane protein-targeting machinery.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab090
PMCID: PMC8321541
PMID: 33837778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


942. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3220-3234. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab093.

DNA Breaks-Mediated Fitness Cost Reveals RNase HI as a New Target for 
Selectively Eliminating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria.

Balbontín R(1), Frazão N(1), Gordo I(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.

Antibiotic resistance often generates defects in bacterial growth called fitness 
cost. Understanding the causes of this cost is of paramount importance, as it is 
one of the main determinants of the prevalence of resistances upon reducing 
antibiotics use. Here we show that the fitness costs of antibiotic resistance 
mutations that affect transcription and translation in Escherichia coli strongly 
correlate with DNA breaks, which are generated via transcription-translation 
uncoupling, increased formation of RNA-DNA hybrids (R-loops), and elevated 
replication-transcription conflicts. We also demonstrated that the mechanisms 
generating DNA breaks are repeatedly targeted by compensatory evolution, and 
that DNA breaks and the cost of resistance can be increased by targeting the 
RNase HI, which specifically degrades R-loops. We further show that the DNA 
damage and thus the fitness cost caused by lack of RNase HI function drive 
resistant clones to extinction in populations with high initial frequency of 
resistance, both in laboratory conditions and in a mouse model of gut 
colonization. Thus, RNase HI provides a target specific against resistant 
bacteria, which we validate using a repurposed drug. In summary, we revealed key 
mechanisms underlying the fitness cost of antibiotic resistance mutations that 
can be exploited to specifically eliminate resistant bacteria.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab093
PMCID: PMC8321526
PMID: 33830249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


943. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3126-3143. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab086.

Genetic Barriers to Historical Gene Flow between Cryptic Species of Alpine 
Bumblebees Revealed by Comparative Population Genomics.

Christmas MJ(1), Jones JC(1)(2), Olsson A(1), Wallerman O(1), Bunikis I(3), 
Kierczak M(4), Peona V(5), Whitley KM(6)(7), Larva T(1), Suh A(5)(8), 
Miller-Struttmann NE(9), Geib JC(6), Webster MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)School of Biology and Environmental Science, University College Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, National Bioinformatics 
Infrastructure Sweden, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(5)Department of Organismal Biology-Systematic Biology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Department of Biology, Appalachian State University, Boone, NC, USA.
(7)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service, Charleston, SC, 
USA.
(8)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(9)Biological Sciences Department, Webster University, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Evidence is accumulating that gene flow commonly occurs between recently 
diverged species, despite the existence of barriers to gene flow in their 
genomes. However, we still know little about what regions of the genome become 
barriers to gene flow and how such barriers form. Here, we compare genetic 
differentiation across the genomes of bumblebee species living in sympatry and 
allopatry to reveal the potential impact of gene flow during species divergence 
and uncover genetic barrier loci. We first compared the genomes of the alpine 
bumblebee Bombus sylvicola and a previously unidentified sister species living 
in sympatry in the Rocky Mountains, revealing prominent islands of elevated 
genetic divergence in the genome that colocalize with centromeres and regions of 
low recombination. This same pattern is observed between the genomes of another 
pair of closely related species living in allopatry (B. bifarius and 
B. vancouverensis). Strikingly however, the genomic islands exhibit 
significantly elevated absolute divergence (dXY) in the sympatric, but not the 
allopatric, comparison indicating that they contain loci that have acted as 
barriers to historical gene flow in sympatry. Our results suggest that intrinsic 
barriers to gene flow between species may often accumulate in regions of low 
recombination and near centromeres through processes such as genetic 
hitchhiking, and that divergence in these regions is accentuated in the presence 
of gene flow.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab086
PMCID: PMC8321533
PMID: 33823537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


944. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3033-3045. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab098.

Ten Years of Collaborative Progress in the Quest for Orthologs.

Linard B(1)(2), Ebersberger I(3)(4)(5), McGlynn SE(6)(7), Glover N(8)(9)(10), 
Mochizuki T(6), Patricio M(11), Lecompte O(12), Nevers Y(8)(9)(10), Thomas 
PD(13), Gabaldón T(14)(15)(16), Sonnhammer E(17), Dessimoz C(8)(9)(10)(18)(19), 
Uchiyama I(20); QFO Consortium.

Collaborators: Altenhoff A, Ouangraoua A, Vesztrocy AW, Linard B, Dessimoz C, 
Szklarczyk D, Durand D, Emms D, Moi D, Thybert D, Sonnhammer E, Kriventseva E, 
Tang H, Chiba H, Uchiyama I, Ebersberger I, Huerta-Cepas J, Fernandez-Breis JT, 
Blake JA, Pryszcz L, Martin MJ, Houben MM, Patricio M, Muffato M, Glover N, 
Lecompte O, Thomas PD, Schiffer P, Capella-Gutierrez S, Cosentino S, McGlynn SE, 
Kuraku S, Forslund S, Kelly S, Lewis S, Jones T, de Farias TM, Maeda T, Gabaldon 
T, Iwasaki W, Pearson W, Wang Y, Nevers Y, Hara Y.

Author information:
(1)LIRMM, University of Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
(2)SPYGEN, Le Bourget-du-Lac, France.
(3)Institute of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Goethe University Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Senckenberg Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (S-BIKF), Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(5)LOEWE Center for Translational Biodiversity Genomics (TBG), Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(6)Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Meguro, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(7)Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(9)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(10)Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(11)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(12)Department of Computer Science, ICube, UMR 7357, University of Strasbourg, 
CNRS, Fédération de Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(13)Division of Bioinformatics, Department of Preventive Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(14)Barcelona Supercomputing Centre (BCS-CNS), Jordi Girona, Barcelona, Spain.
(15)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), The Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain.
(16)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(17)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Stockholm University, Solna, Sweden.
(18)Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(19)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(20)Department of Theoretical Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology, 
National Institutes of Natural Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, Japan.

Accurate determination of the evolutionary relationships between genes is a 
foundational challenge in biology. Homology-evolutionary relatedness-is in many 
cases readily determined based on sequence similarity analysis. By contrast, 
whether or not two genes directly descended from a common ancestor by a 
speciation event (orthologs) or duplication event (paralogs) is more 
challenging, yet provides critical information on the history of a gene. Since 
2009, this task has been the focus of the Quest for Orthologs (QFO) Consortium. 
The sixth QFO meeting took place in Okazaki, Japan in conjunction with the 67th 
National Institute for Basic Biology conference. Here, we report recent 
advances, applications, and oncoming challenges that were discussed during the 
conference. Steady progress has been made toward standardization and scalability 
of new and existing tools. A feature of the conference was the presentation of a 
panel of accessible tools for phylogenetic profiling and several developments to 
bring orthology beyond the gene unit-from domains to networks. This meeting 
brought into light several challenges to come: leveraging orthology computations 
to get the most of the incoming avalanche of genomic data, integrating orthology 
from domain to biological network levels, building better gene models, and 
adapting orthology approaches to the broad evolutionary and genomic diversity 
recognized in different forms of life and viruses.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab098
PMCID: PMC8321534
PMID: 33822172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


945. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3202-3219. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab092.

Migration through a Major Andean Ecogeographic Disruption as a Driver of Genetic 
and Phenotypic Diversity in a Wild Tomato Species.

Landis JB(1)(2), Miller CM(3), Broz AK(3), Bennett AA(2), Carrasquilla-Garcia 
N(4), Cook DR(4), Last RL(5)(6), Bedinger PA(3), Moghe GD(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, University of California, Riverside, 
Riverside, CA, USA.
(2)Plant Biology Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell 
University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(4)Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, 
USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
USA.

Evolutionary dynamics at the population level play a central role in creating 
the diversity of life on our planet. In this study, we sought to understand the 
origins of such population-level variation in mating systems and defensive 
acylsugar chemistry in Solanum habrochaites-a wild tomato species found in 
diverse Andean habitats in Ecuador and Peru. Using 
Restriction-site-Associated-DNA-Sequencing (RAD-seq) of 50 S. habrochaites 
accessions, we identified eight population clusters generated via isolation and 
hybridization dynamics of 4-6 ancestral populations. Detailed characterization 
of mating systems of these clusters revealed emergence of multiple 
self-compatible (SC) groups from progenitor self-incompatible populations in the 
northern part of the species range. Emergence of these SC groups was also 
associated with fixation of deleterious alleles inactivating acylsugar 
acetylation. The Amotape-Huancabamba Zone-a geographical landmark in the Andes 
with high endemism and isolated microhabitats-was identified as a major driver 
of differentiation in the northern species range, whereas large geographical 
distances contributed to population structure and evolution of a novel SC group 
in the central and southern parts of the range, where the species was also 
inferred to have originated. Findings presented here highlight the role of the 
diverse ecogeography of Peru and Ecuador in generating population 
differentiation, and enhance our understanding of the microevolutionary 
processes that create biological diversity.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab092
PMCID: PMC8321546
PMID: 33822137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


946. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3093-3110. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab078.

Demographic History, Adaptation, and NRAP Convergent Evolution at Amino Acid 
Residue 100 in the World Northernmost Cattle from Siberia.

Buggiotti L(1), Yurchenko AA(2)(3), Yudin NS(2)(3), Vander Jagt CJ(4), Vorobieva 
NV(5), Kusliy MA(5), Vasiliev SK(6), Rodionov AN(7), Boronetskaya OI(8), 
Zinovieva NA(7), Graphodatsky AS(5), Daetwyler HD(4)(9), Larkin DM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Royal Veterinary College, University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)The Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian 
Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences (ICG SB RAS), Novosibirsk, Russia.
(3)Kurchatov Genomics Center, Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian 
Branch of the Russian Academy of Science, Novosibirsk, Russia.
(4)Agriculture Victoria, AgriBio, Centre for AgriBioscience, Bundoora, VIC, 
Australia.
(5)Department of the Diversity and Evolution of Genomes, Institute of Molecular 
and Cellular Biology SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia.
(6)Paleometal Archeology Department, Institute of Archaeology and Ethnography SB 
RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia.
(7)L.K. Ernst Federal Research Centre for Animal Husbandry, Podolsk, Russia.
(8)Moscow Agrarian Academy, Timiryazev Russian State Agrarian University, 
Moscow, Russia.
(9)School of Applied Systems Biology, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC, 
Australia.

Native cattle breeds represent an important cultural heritage. They are a 
reservoir of genetic variation useful for properly responding to agriculture 
needs in the light of ongoing climate changes. Evolutionary processes that occur 
in response to extreme environmental conditions could also be better understood 
using adapted local populations. Herein, different evolutionary histories of the 
world northernmost native cattle breeds from Russia were investigated. They 
highlighted Kholmogory as a typical taurine cattle, whereas Yakut cattle 
separated from European taurines approximately 5,000 years ago and contain 
numerous ancestral and some novel genetic variants allowing their adaptation to 
harsh conditions of living above the Polar Circle. Scans for selection 
signatures pointed to several common gene pathways related to adaptation to 
harsh climates in both breeds. But genes affected by selection from these 
pathways were mostly different. A Yakut cattle breed-specific missense mutation 
in a highly conserved NRAP gene represents a unique example of a young amino 
acid residue convergent change shared with at least 16 species of 
hibernating/cold-adapted mammals from six distinct phylogenetic orders. This 
suggests a convergent evolution event along the mammalian phylogenetic tree and 
fast fixation in a single isolated cattle population exposed to a harsh climate.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab078
PMCID: PMC8321547
PMID: 33784744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


947. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3910-3924. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab096.

Novelty and Convergence in Adaptation to Whole Genome Duplication.

Bohutínská M(1)(2), Alston M(3), Monnahan P(3), Mandáková T(4), Bray S(5)(6), 
Paajanen P(3), Kolář F(1)(2)(7), Yant L(5)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(2)Institute of Botany, The Czech Academy of Sciences, Průhonice, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich 
Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(4)CEITEC-Central European Institute of Technology, and Faculty of Science, 
Masaryk University, Kamenice, Czech Republic.
(5)Future Food Beacon of Excellence, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 
United Kingdom.
(6)School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(7)Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(8)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United 
Kingdom.

Whole genome duplication (WGD) can promote adaptation but is disruptive to 
conserved processes, especially meiosis. Studies in Arabidopsis arenosa revealed 
a coordinated evolutionary response to WGD involving interacting proteins 
controlling meiotic crossovers, which are minimized in an autotetraploid 
(within-species polyploid) to avoid missegregation. Here, we test whether this 
surprising flexibility of a conserved essential process, meiosis, is 
recapitulated in an independent WGD system, Cardamine amara, 17 My diverged from 
A. arenosa. We assess meiotic stability and perform population-based scans for 
positive selection, contrasting the genomic response to WGD in C. amara with 
that of A. arenosa. We found in C. amara the strongest selection signals at 
genes with predicted functions thought important to adaptation to WGD: meiosis, 
chromosome remodeling, cell cycle, and ion transport. However, genomic responses 
to WGD in the two species differ: minimal ortholog-level convergence emerged, 
with none of the meiosis genes found in A. arenosa exhibiting strong signal in 
C. amara. This is consistent with our observations of lower meiotic stability 
and occasional clonal spreading in diploid C. amara, suggesting that nascent C. 
amara autotetraploid lineages were preadapted by their diploid lifestyle to 
survive while enduring reduced meiotic fidelity. However, in contrast to a lack 
of ortholog convergence, we see process-level and network convergence in DNA 
management, chromosome organization, stress signaling, and ion homeostasis 
processes. This gives the first insight into the salient adaptations required to 
meet the challenges of a WGD state and shows that autopolyploids can utilize 
multiple evolutionary trajectories to adapt to WGD.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab096
PMCID: PMC8382928
PMID: 33783509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


948. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3235-3246. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab095.

Understanding the Origins of Loss of Protein Function by Analyzing the Effects 
of Thousands of Variants on Activity and Abundance.

Cagiada M(1), Johansson KE(1), Valanciute A(1), Nielsen SV(1), Hartmann-Petersen 
R(1), Yang JJ(2)(3), Fowler DM(4)(5), Stein A(1), Lindorff-Larsen K(1).

Author information:
(1)Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(4)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Understanding and predicting how amino acid substitutions affect proteins are 
keys to our basic understanding of protein function and evolution. Amino acid 
changes may affect protein function in a number of ways including direct 
perturbations of activity or indirect effects on protein folding and stability. 
We have analyzed 6,749 experimentally determined variant effects from 
multiplexed assays on abundance and activity in two proteins (NUDT15 and PTEN) 
to quantify these effects and find that a third of the variants cause loss of 
function, and about half of loss-of-function variants also have low cellular 
abundance. We analyze the structural and mechanistic origins of loss of function 
and use the experimental data to find residues important for enzymatic activity. 
We performed computational analyses of protein stability and evolutionary 
conservation and show how we may predict positions where variants cause loss of 
activity or abundance. In this way, our results link thermodynamic stability and 
evolutionary conservation to experimental studies of different properties of 
protein fitness landscapes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab095
PMCID: PMC8321532
PMID: 33779753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


949. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4166-4186. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab094.

Analysis of Fungal Genomes Reveals Commonalities of Intron Gain or Loss and 
Functions in Intron-Poor Species.

Lim CS(1), Weinstein BN(2)(3), Roy SW(2)(3), Brown CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Biomedical Sciences, and Genetics 
Otago, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(2)Quantitative & Systems Biology, School of Natural Sciences, University of 
California-Merced, Merced, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, 
USA.

Previous evolutionary reconstructions have concluded that early eukaryotic 
ancestors including both the last common ancestor of eukaryotes and of all fungi 
had intron-rich genomes. By contrast, some extant eukaryotes have few introns, 
underscoring the complex histories of intron-exon structures, and raising the 
question as to why these few introns are retained. Here, we have used recently 
available fungal genomes to address a variety of questions related to intron 
evolution. Evolutionary reconstruction of intron presence and absence using 263 
diverse fungal species supports the idea that massive intron reduction through 
intron loss has occurred in multiple clades. The intron densities estimated in 
various fungal ancestors differ from zero to 7.6 introns per 1 kb of 
protein-coding sequence. Massive intron loss has occurred not only in 
microsporidian parasites and saccharomycetous yeasts, but also in diverse smuts 
and allies. To investigate the roles of the remaining introns in highly-reduced 
species, we have searched for their special characteristics in eight intron-poor 
fungi. Notably, the introns of ribosome-associated genes RPL7 and NOG2 have 
conserved positions; both intron-containing genes encoding snoRNAs. Furthermore, 
both the proteins and snoRNAs are involved in ribosome biogenesis, suggesting 
that the expression of the protein-coding genes and noncoding snoRNAs may be 
functionally coordinated. Indeed, these introns are also conserved in 
three-quarters of fungi species. Our study shows that fungal introns have a 
complex evolutionary history and underappreciated roles in gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab094
PMCID: PMC8476143
PMID: 33772558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


950. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2946-2957. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab089.

Inferring the Genetic Basis of Sex Determination from the Genome of a Dioecious 
Nightshade.

Wu M(1), Haak DC(2), Anderson GJ(3), Hahn MW(1)(4), Moyle LC(1), Guerrero 
RF(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
(2)School of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, 
USA.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, USA.

Dissecting the genetic mechanisms underlying dioecy (i.e., separate female and 
male individuals) is critical for understanding the evolution of this pervasive 
reproductive strategy. Nonetheless, the genetic basis of sex determination 
remains unclear in many cases, especially in systems where dioecy has arisen 
recently. Within the economically important plant genus Solanum (∼2,000 
species), dioecy is thought to have evolved independently at least 4 times 
across roughly 20 species. Here, we generate the first genome sequence of a 
dioecious Solanum and use it to ascertain the genetic basis of sex determination 
in this species. We de novo assembled and annotated the genome of Solanum 
appendiculatum (assembly size: ∼750 Mb scaffold N50: 0.92 Mb; ∼35,000 genes), 
identified sex-specific sequences and their locations in the genome, and 
inferred that males in this species are the heterogametic sex. We also analyzed 
gene expression patterns in floral tissues of males and females, finding 
approximately 100 genes that are differentially expressed between the sexes. 
These analyses, together with observed patterns of gene-family evolution 
specific to S. appendiculatum, consistently implicate a suite of genes from the 
regulatory network controlling pectin degradation and modification in the 
expression of sex. Furthermore, the genome of a species with a relatively young 
sex-determination system provides the foundational resources for future studies 
on the independent evolution of dioecy in this clade.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab089
PMCID: PMC8233512
PMID: 33769517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


951. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3188-3201. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab091.

Piggybacking on Niche Adaptation Improves the Maintenance of 
Multidrug-Resistance Plasmids.

Kloos J(1), Gama JA(1), Hegstad J(1)(2), Samuelsen Ø(1)(3), Johnsen PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health Sciences, UiT The Arctic University 
of Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, University Hospital of 
North Norway, Tromsø, Norway.
(3)Norwegian National Advisory Unit on Detection of Antimicrobial Resistance, 
Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, University Hospital of North 
Norway, Tromsø, Norway.

The persistence of plasmids in bacterial populations represents a puzzling 
evolutionary problem with serious clinical implications due to their role in the 
ongoing antibiotic resistance crisis. Recently, major advancements have been 
made toward resolving this "plasmid paradox" but mainly in a nonclinical 
context. Here, we propose an additional explanation for the maintenance of 
multidrug-resistance plasmids in clinical Escherichia coli strains. After 
coevolving two multidrug-resistance plasmids encoding resistance to last resort 
carbapenems with an extraintestinal pathogenic E. coli strain, we observed that 
chromosomal media adaptive mutations in the global regulatory systems CCR 
(carbon catabolite repression) and ArcAB (aerobic respiration control) 
pleiotropically improved the maintenance of both plasmids. Mechanistically, a 
net downregulation of plasmid gene expression reduced the fitness cost. Our 
results suggest that global chromosomal transcriptional rewiring during 
bacterial niche adaptation may facilitate plasmid maintenance.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab091
PMCID: PMC8321521
PMID: 33760032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


952. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3153-3169. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab088.

The Evolution of Sox Gene Repertoires and Regulation of Segmentation in 
Arachnids.

Baudouin-Gonzalez L(1), Schoenauer A(1), Harper A(1), Blakeley G(1), Seiter 
M(2), Arif S(1)(3), Sumner-Rooney L(4), Russell S(5), Sharma PP(6), McGregor 
AP(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Life 
Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Unit Integrative Zoology, Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Centre for Functional Genomics, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Oxford University Museum of Natural History, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, USA.

The Sox family of transcription factors regulates many processes during metazoan 
development, including stem cell maintenance and nervous system specification. 
Characterizing the repertoires and roles of these genes can therefore provide 
important insights into animal evolution and development. We further 
characterized the Sox repertoires of several arachnid species with and without 
an ancestral whole-genome duplication and compared their expression between the 
spider Parasteatoda tepidariorum and the harvestman Phalangium opilio. We found 
that most Sox families have been retained as ohnologs after whole-genome 
duplication and evidence for potential subfunctionalization and/or 
neofunctionalization events. Our results also suggest that Sox21b-1 likely 
regulated segmentation ancestrally in arachnids, playing a similar role to the 
closely related SoxB gene, Dichaete, in insects. We previously showed that 
Sox21b-1 is required for the simultaneous formation of prosomal segments and 
sequential addition of opisthosomal segments in P. tepidariorum. We studied the 
expression and function of Sox21b-1 further in this spider and found that 
although this gene regulates the generation of both prosomal and opisthosomal 
segments, it plays different roles in the formation of these tagmata reflecting 
their contrasting modes of segmentation and deployment of gene regulatory 
networks with different architectures.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab088
PMCID: PMC8661403
PMID: 33755150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


953. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2677-2691. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab064.

High-Altitude Adaptation: Mechanistic Insights from Integrated Genomics and 
Physiology.

Storz JF(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE, USA.

Population genomic analyses of high-altitude humans and other vertebrates have 
identified numerous candidate genes for hypoxia adaptation, and the 
physiological pathways implicated by such analyses suggest testable hypotheses 
about underlying mechanisms. Studies of highland natives that integrate genomic 
data with experimental measures of physiological performance capacities and 
subordinate traits are revealing associations between genotypes (e.g., 
hypoxia-inducible factor gene variants) and hypoxia-responsive phenotypes. The 
subsequent search for causal mechanisms is complicated by the fact that observed 
genotypic associations with hypoxia-induced phenotypes may reflect second-order 
consequences of selection-mediated changes in other (unmeasured) traits that are 
coupled with the focal trait via feedback regulation. Manipulative experiments 
to decipher circuits of feedback control and patterns of phenotypic integration 
can help identify causal relationships that underlie observed genotype-phenotype 
associations. Such experiments are critical for correct inferences about 
phenotypic targets of selection and mechanisms of adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab064
PMCID: PMC8233491
PMID: 33751123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


954. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3144-3152. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab087.

Exploring a Local Genetic Interaction Network Using Evolutionary Replay 
Experiments.

Vignogna RC(1), Buskirk SW(1), Lang GI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA.

Understanding how genes interact is a central challenge in biology. Experimental 
evolution provides a useful, but underutilized, tool for identifying genetic 
interactions, particularly those that involve non-loss-of-function mutations or 
mutations in essential genes. We previously identified a strong positive genetic 
interaction between specific mutations in KEL1 (P344T) and HSL7 (A695fs) that 
arose in an experimentally evolved Saccharomyces cerevisiae population. Because 
this genetic interaction is not phenocopied by gene deletion, it was previously 
unknown. Using "evolutionary replay" experiments, we identified additional 
mutations that have positive genetic interactions with the kel1-P344T mutation. 
We replayed the evolution of this population 672 times from six timepoints. We 
identified 30 populations where the kel1-P344T mutation reached high frequency. 
We performed whole-genome sequencing on these populations to identify genes in 
which mutations arose specifically in the kel1-P344T background. We 
reconstructed mutations in the ancestral and kel1-P344T backgrounds to validate 
positive genetic interactions. We identify several genetic interactors with 
KEL1, we validate these interactions by reconstruction experiments, and we show 
these interactions are not recapitulated by loss-of-function mutations. Our 
results demonstrate the power of experimental evolution to identify genetic 
interactions that are positive, allele specific, and not readily detected by 
other methods, shedding light on an underexplored region of the yeast genetic 
interaction network.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab087
PMCID: PMC8321538
PMID: 33749796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


955. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3898-3909. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab085.

Enhancer Pleiotropy, Gene Expression, and the Architecture of Human 
Enhancer-Gene Interactions.

Singh D(1), Yi SV(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.

Enhancers are often studied as noncoding regulatory elements that modulate the 
precise spatiotemporal expression of genes in a highly tissue-specific manner. 
This paradigm has been challenged by recent evidence of individual enhancers 
acting in multiple tissues or developmental contexts. However, the frequency of 
these enhancers with high degrees of "pleiotropy" out of all putative enhancers 
is not well understood. Consequently, it is unclear how the variation of 
enhancer pleiotropy corresponds to the variation in expression breadth of target 
genes. Here, we use multi-tissue chromatin maps from diverse human tissues to 
investigate the enhancer-gene interaction architecture while accounting for 1) 
the distribution of enhancer pleiotropy, 2) the variations of regulatory links 
from enhancers to target genes, and 3) the expression breadth of target genes. 
We show that most enhancers are tissue-specific and that highly pleiotropy 
enhancers account for <1% of all putative regulatory sequences in the human 
genome. Notably, several genomic features are indicative of increasing enhancer 
pleiotropy, including longer sequence length, greater number of links to genes, 
increasing abundance and diversity of encoded transcription factor motifs, and 
stronger evolutionary conservation. Intriguingly, the number of enhancers per 
gene remains remarkably consistent for all genes (∼14). However, enhancer 
pleiotropy does not directly translate to the expression breadth of target 
genes. We further present a series of Gaussian Mixture Models to represent this 
organization architecture. Consequently, we demonstrate that a modest trend of 
more pleiotropic enhancers targeting more broadly expressed genes can generate 
the observed diversity of expression breadths in the human genome.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab085
PMCID: PMC8383896
PMID: 33749795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


956. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2767-2777. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab065.

Limited Predictability of Amino Acid Substitutions in Seasonal Influenza 
Viruses.

Barrat-Charlaix P(1)(2), Huddleston J(3)(4), Bedford T(3)(4), Neher RA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biozentrum, Universität Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA, USA.
(4)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA.

Seasonal influenza viruses repeatedly infect humans in part because they rapidly 
change their antigenic properties and evade host immune responses, necessitating 
frequent updates of the vaccine composition. Accurate predictions of strains 
circulating in the future could therefore improve the vaccine match. Here, we 
studied the predictability of frequency dynamics and fixation of amino acid 
substitutions. Current frequency was the strongest predictor of eventual 
fixation, as expected in neutral evolution. Other properties, such as occurrence 
in previously characterized epitopes or high Local Branching Index (LBI) had 
little predictive power. Parallel evolution was found to be moderately 
predictive of fixation. Although the LBI had little power to predict frequency 
dynamics, it was still successful at picking strains representative of future 
populations. The latter is due to a tendency of the LBI to be high for 
consensus-like sequences that are closer to the future than the average 
sequence. Simulations of models of adapting populations, in contrast, show clear 
signals of predictability. This indicates that the evolution of influenza HA and 
NA, while driven by strong selection pressure to change, is poorly described by 
common models of directional selection such as traveling fitness waves.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab065
PMCID: PMC8233509
PMID: 33749787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


957. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2915-2929. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab081.

A Comprehensive Phylogenetic Analysis of the Serpin Superfamily.

Spence MA(1), Mortimer MD(1), Buckle AM(2), Minh BQ(3), Jackson CJ(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedicine Discovery 
Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(3)Research School of Computing and Research School of Biology, Australian 
National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(4)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide 
and Protein Science, Research School of Chemistry, Australian National 
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(5)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Synthetic Biology, 
Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.

Serine protease inhibitors (serpins) are found in all kingdoms of life and play 
essential roles in multiple physiological processes. Owing to the diversity of 
the superfamily, phylogenetic analysis is challenging and prokaryotic serpins 
have been speculated to have been acquired from Metazoa through horizontal gene 
transfer due to their unexpectedly high homology. Here, we have leveraged a 
structural alignment of diverse serpins to generate a comprehensive 
6,000-sequence phylogeny that encompasses serpins from all kingdoms of life. We 
show that in addition to a central "hub" of highly conserved serpins, there has 
been extensive diversification of the superfamily into many novel functional 
clades. Our analysis indicates that the hub proteins are ancient and are similar 
because of convergent evolution, rather than the alternative hypothesis of 
horizontal gene transfer. This work clarifies longstanding questions in the 
evolution of serpins and provides new directions for research in the field of 
serpin biology.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab081
PMCID: PMC8233489
PMID: 33744972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


958. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3111-3125. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab084.

Genomic Signatures for Species-Specific Adaptation in Lake Victoria Cichlids 
Derived from Large-Scale Standing Genetic Variation.

Nakamura H(1), Aibara M(1), Kajitani R(1), Mrosso HDJ(2), Mzighani SI(3)(4), 
Toyoda A(5), Itoh T(1), Okada N(6), Nikaido M(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute (TAFIRI), Mwanza Fisheries Research 
Center, Mwanza, Tanzania.
(3)Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute (TAFIRI), Headquarters, Dar es Salaam, 
Tanzania.
(4)Fisheries Education and Training Agency, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(5)Comparative Genomics Laboratory, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, 
Shizuoka, Japan.
(6)School of Pharmacy, Kitasato University, Kanagawa, Japan.

The cichlids of Lake Victoria are a textbook example of adaptive radiation, as 
>500 endemic species arose in just 14,600 years. The degree of genetic 
differentiation among species is very low due to the short period of time after 
the radiation, which allows us to ascertain highly differentiated genes that are 
strong candidates for driving speciation and adaptation. Previous studies have 
revealed the critical contribution of vision to speciation by showing the 
existence of highly differentiated alleles in the visual opsin gene among 
species with different habitat depths. In contrast, the processes of 
species-specific adaptation to different ecological backgrounds remain to be 
investigated. Here, we used genome-wide comparative analyses of three species of 
Lake Victoria cichlids that inhabit different environments-Haplochromis 
chilotes, H. sauvagei, and Lithochromis rufus-to elucidate the processes of 
adaptation by estimating population history and by searching for candidate genes 
that contribute to adaptation. The patterns of changes in population size were 
quite distinct among the species according to their habitats. We identified many 
novel adaptive candidate genes, some of which had surprisingly long divergent 
haplotypes between species, thus showing the footprint of selective sweep 
events. Molecular phylogenetic analyses revealed that a large fraction of the 
allelic diversity among Lake Victoria cichlids was derived from standing genetic 
variation that originated before the adaptive radiation. Our analyses uncovered 
the processes of species-specific adaptation of Lake Victoria cichlids and the 
complexity of the genomic substrate that facilitated this adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab084
PMCID: PMC8321545
PMID: 33744961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


959. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2930-2945. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab083.

Functional and Adaptive Significance of Promoter Mutations That Affect Divergent 
Myocardial Expressions of TRIM72 in Primates.

Feng Y(1), Xu H(1), Liu J(1), Xie N(1), Gao L(2), He Y(1), Yao Y(1), Lv F(1), 
Zhang Y(1), Lu J(3)(4)(5), Zhang W(3)(4)(5), Li CY(1), Hu X(1), Yang Z(6), Xiao 
RP(1)(3)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Future Technology, Peking 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, Beijing, China.
(5)School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Beijing, 
China.
(8)Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiometabolic Molecular Medicine, Peking 
University, Beijing, China.

Cis-regulatory elements play important roles in tissue-specific gene expression 
and in the evolution of various phenotypes, and mutations in promoters and 
enhancers may be responsible for adaptations of species to environments. TRIM72 
is a highly conserved protein that is involved in energy metabolism. Its 
expression in the heart varies considerably in primates, with high levels of 
expression in Old World monkeys and near absence in hominids. Here, we combine 
phylogenetic hypothesis testing and experimentation to demonstrate that 
mutations in promoter are responsible for the differences among primate species 
in the heart-specific expression of TRIM72. Maximum likelihood estimates of 
lineage-specific substitution rates under local-clock models show that relative 
to the evolutionary rate of introns, the rate of promoter was accelerated by 78% 
in the common ancestor of Old World monkeys, suggesting a role for positive 
selection in the evolution of the TRIM72 promoter, possibly driven by selective 
pressure due to changes in cardiac physiology after species divergence. We 
demonstrate that mutations in the TRIM72 promoter account for the differential 
myocardial TRIM72 expression of the human and the rhesus macaque. Furthermore, 
changes in TRIM72 expression alter the expression of genes involved in oxidative 
phosphorylation, which in turn affects mitochondrial respiration and cardiac 
energy capacity. On a broader timescale, phylogenetic regression analyses of 
data from 29 mammalian species show that mammals with high cardiac expression of 
TRIM72 have high heart rate, suggesting that the expression changes of TRIM72 
may be related to differences in the heart physiology of those species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab083
PMCID: PMC8233513
PMID: 33744959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


960. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2869-2879. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab077.

Historical Contingency Causes Divergence in Adaptive Expression of the lac 
Operon.

Karkare K(1), Lai HY(2), Azevedo RBR(1), Cooper TF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(2)School of Natural and Computational Sciences, Massey University, Auckland, 
New Zealand.

Populations of Escherichia coli selected in constant and fluctuating 
environments containing lactose often adapt by substituting mutations in the 
lacI repressor that cause constitutive expression of the lac operon. These 
mutations occur at a high rate and provide a significant benefit. Despite this, 
eight of 24 populations evolved for 8,000 generations in environments containing 
lactose contained no detectable repressor mutations. We report here on the basis 
of this observation. We find that, given relevant mutation rates, repressor 
mutations are expected to have fixed in all evolved populations if they had 
maintained the same fitness effect they confer when introduced to the ancestor. 
In fact, reconstruction experiments demonstrate that repressor mutations have 
become neutral or deleterious in those populations in which they were not 
detectable. Populations not fixing repressor mutations nevertheless reached the 
same fitness as those that did fix them, indicating that they followed an 
alternative evolutionary path that made redundant the potential benefit of the 
repressor mutation, but involved unique mutations of equivalent benefit. We 
identify a mutation occurring in the promoter region of the uspB gene as a 
candidate for influencing the selective choice between these paths. Our results 
detail an example of historical contingency leading to divergent evolutionary 
outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab077
PMCID: PMC8233506
PMID: 33744956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


961. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3004-3021. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab068.

Phylogenetic Permulations: A Statistically Rigorous Approach to Measure 
Confidence in Associations in a Phylogenetic Context.

Saputra E(1)(2), Kowalczyk A(1)(2), Cusick L(3), Clark N(2)(4)(5), Chikina M(2).

Author information:
(1)Joint Carnegie Mellon University - University of Pittsburgh PhD Program in 
Computational Biology, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(5)Pittsburgh Center for Evolutionary Biology and Medicine, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Many evolutionary comparative methods seek to identify associations between 
phenotypic traits or between traits and genotypes, often with the goal of 
inferring potential functional relationships between them. Comparative genomics 
methods aimed at this goal measure the association between evolutionary changes 
at the genetic level with traits evolving convergently across phylogenetic 
lineages. However, these methods have complex statistical behaviors that are 
influenced by nontrivial and oftentimes unknown confounding factors. 
Consequently, using standard statistical analyses in interpreting the outputs of 
these methods leads to potentially inaccurate conclusions. Here, we introduce 
phylogenetic permulations, a novel statistical strategy that combines 
phylogenetic simulations and permutations to calculate accurate, unbiased P 
values from phylogenetic methods. Permulations construct the null expectation 
for P values from a given phylogenetic method by empirically generating null 
phenotypes. Subsequently, empirical P values that capture the true statistical 
confidence given the correlation structure in the data are directly calculated 
based on the empirical null expectation. We examine the performance of 
permulation methods by analyzing both binary and continuous phenotypes, 
including marine, subterranean, and long-lived large-bodied mammal phenotypes. 
Our results reveal that permulations improve the statistical power of 
phylogenetic analyses and correctly calibrate statements of confidence in 
rejecting complex null distributions while maintaining or improving the 
enrichment of known functions related to the phenotype. We also find that 
permulations refine pathway enrichment analyses by correcting for 
nonindependence in gene ranks. Our results demonstrate that permulations are a 
powerful tool for improving statistical confidence in the conclusions of 
phylogenetic analysis when the parametric null is unknown.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab068
PMCID: PMC8233500
PMID: 33739420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


962. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2897-2914. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab080.

Horizontal Gene Transfer and Gene Duplication of β-Fructofuranosidase Confer 
Lepidopteran Insects Metabolic Benefits.

Dai X(1), Kiuchi T(2), Zhou Y(1), Jia S(1), Xu Y(1), Katsuma S(2), Shimada 
T(2)(3), Wang H(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Laboratory of Insect Genetics and Bioscience, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Life Science, Faculty of Science, Gakushuin University, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is a potentially critical source of material for 
ecological adaptation and the evolution of novel genetic traits. However, 
reports on posttransfer duplication in organism genomes are lacking, and the 
evolutionary advantages conferred on the recipient are generally poorly 
understood. Sucrase plays an important role in insect physiological growth and 
development. Here, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the evolution of 
insect β-fructofuranosidase transferred from bacteria via HGT. We found that 
posttransfer duplications of β-fructofuranosidase were widespread in Lepidoptera 
and sporadic occurrences of β-fructofuranosidase were found in Coleoptera and 
Hymenoptera. β-fructofuranosidase genes often undergo modifications, such as 
gene duplication, differential gene loss, and changes in mutation rates. 
Lepidopteran β-fructofuranosidase gene (SUC) clusters showed marked divergence 
in gene expression patterns and enzymatic properties in Bombyx mori (moth) and 
Papilio xuthus (butterfly). We generated SUC1 mutations in B. mori using 
CRISPR/Cas9 to thoroughly examine the physiological function of SUC. BmSUC1 
mutant larvae were viable but displayed delayed growth and reduced sucrase 
activities that included susceptibility to the sugar mimic alkaloid found in 
high concentrations in mulberry. BmSUC1 served as a critical sucrase and 
supported metabolic homeostasis in the larval midgut and silk gland, suggesting 
that gene transfer of β-fructofuranosidase enhanced the digestive and metabolic 
adaptation of lepidopteran insects. These findings highlight not only the 
universal function of β-fructofuranosidase with a link to the maintenance of 
carbohydrate metabolism but also an underexplored function in the silk gland. 
This study expands our knowledge of posttransfer duplication and subsequent 
functional diversification in the adaptive evolution and lineage-specific 
adaptation of organisms.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab080
PMCID: PMC8233494
PMID: 33739418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


963. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2880-2896. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab079.

Rubisco Adaptation Is More Limited by Phylogenetic Constraint Than by Catalytic 
Trade-off.

Bouvier JW(1)(2), Emms DM(1), Rhodes T(3), Bolton JS(2), Brasnett A(2), 
Eddershaw A(2), Nielsen JR(2), Unitt A(2), Whitney SM(3), Kelly S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Doctoral Training Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.

Rubisco assimilates CO2 to form the sugars that fuel life on earth. Correlations 
between rubisco kinetic traits across species have led to the proposition that 
rubisco adaptation is highly constrained by catalytic trade-offs. However, these 
analyses did not consider the phylogenetic context of the enzymes that were 
analyzed. Thus, it is possible that the correlations observed were an artefact 
of the presence of phylogenetic signal in rubisco kinetics and the phylogenetic 
relationship between the species that were sampled. Here, we conducted a 
phylogenetically resolved analysis of rubisco kinetics and show that there is a 
significant phylogenetic signal in rubisco kinetic traits. We re-evaluated the 
extent of catalytic trade-offs accounting for this phylogenetic signal and found 
that all were attenuated. Following phylogenetic correction, the largest 
catalytic trade-offs were observed between the Michaelis constant for CO2 and 
carboxylase turnover (∼21-37%), and between the Michaelis constants for CO2 and 
O2 (∼9-19%), respectively. All other catalytic trade-offs were substantially 
attenuated such that they were marginal (<9%) or non-significant. This 
phylogenetically resolved analysis of rubisco kinetic evolution also identified 
kinetic changes that occur concomitant with the evolution of C4 photosynthesis. 
Finally, we show that phylogenetic constraints have played a larger role than 
catalytic trade-offs in limiting the evolution of rubisco kinetics. Thus, 
although there is strong evidence for some catalytic trade-offs, rubisco 
adaptation has been more limited by phylogenetic constraint than by the combined 
action of all catalytic trade-offs.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab079
PMCID: PMC8233502
PMID: 33739416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


964. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2778-2790. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab067.

Dynamics of Adaptation During Three Years of Evolution Under Long-Term 
Stationary Phase.

Katz S(1), Avrani S(2), Yavneh M(1), Hilau S(1), Gross J(1), Hershberg R(1).

Author information:
(1)Rachel & Menachem Mendelovitch Evolutionary Processes of Mutation & Natural 
Selection Research Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, 
The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of 
Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Department of Evolutionary and Environmental Biology and the Institute of 
Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.

Many bacterial species that cannot sporulate, such as the model bacterium 
Escherichia coli, can nevertheless survive for years, following exhaustion of 
external resources, in a state termed long-term stationary phase (LTSP). Here we 
describe the dynamics of E. coli adaptation during the first three years spent 
under LTSP. We show that during this time, E. coli continuously adapts 
genetically through the accumulation of mutations. For nonmutator clones, the 
majority of mutations accumulated appear to be adaptive under LTSP, reflected in 
an extremely convergent pattern of mutation accumulation. Despite the rapid and 
convergent manner in which populations adapt under LTSP, they continue to harbor 
extensive genetic variation. The dynamics of evolution of mutation rates under 
LTSP are particularly interesting. The emergence of mutators affects overall 
mutation accumulation rates as well as the mutational spectra and the ultimate 
spectrum of adaptive alleles acquired under LTSP. With time, mutators can evolve 
even higher mutation rates through the acquisition of additional mutation 
rate-enhancing mutations. Different mutator and nonmutator clones within a 
single population and time point can display extreme variation in their mutation 
rates, resulting in differences in both the dynamics of adaptation and their 
associated deleterious burdens. Despite these differences, clones that vary 
greatly in their mutation rates tend to coexist within their populations for 
many years, under LTSP.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab067
PMCID: PMC8233507
PMID: 33734381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


965. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3078-3092. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab071.

Ciliary Rootlet Coiled-Coil 2 (crocc2) Is Associated with Evolutionary 
Divergence and Plasticity of Cichlid Jaw Shape.

Gilbert MC(1), Tetrault E(2), Packard M(3), Navon D(1), Albertson RC(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.
(2)Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, USA.

Cichlid fishes exhibit rapid, extensive, and replicative adaptive radiation in 
feeding morphology. Plasticity of the cichlid jaw has also been well documented, 
and this combination of iterative evolution and developmental plasticity has led 
to the proposition that the cichlid feeding apparatus represents a morphological 
"flexible stem." Under this scenario, the fixation of environmentally sensitive 
genetic variation drives evolutionary divergence along a phenotypic axis 
established by the initial plastic response. Thus, if plasticity is predictable 
then so too should be the evolutionary response. We set out to explore these 
ideas at the molecular level by identifying genes that underlie both the 
evolution and plasticity of the cichlid jaw. As a first step, we fine-mapped an 
environment-specific quantitative trait loci for lower jaw shape in cichlids, 
and identified a nonsynonymous mutation in the ciliary rootlet coiled-coil 2 
(crocc2), which encodes a major structural component of the primary cilium. 
Given that primary cilia play key roles in skeletal mechanosensing, we reasoned 
that this gene may confer its effects by regulating the sensitivity of bone to 
respond to mechanical input. Using both cichlids and zebrafish, we confirmed 
this prediction through a series of experiments targeting multiple levels of 
biological organization. Taken together, our results implicate crocc2 as a novel 
mediator of bone formation, plasticity, and evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab071
PMCID: PMC8321518
PMID: 33720362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


966. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2818-2830. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab072.

Discovery of Novel Herpes Simplexviruses in Wild Gorillas, Bonobos, and 
Chimpanzees Supports Zoonotic Origin of HSV-2.

Wertheim JO(1), Hostager R(1), Ryu D(2)(3), Merkel K(2)(3), Angedakin S(4), 
Arandjelovic M(4), Ayimisin EA(4), Babweteera F(5), Bessone M(4)(6), 
Brun-Jeffery KJ(7), Dieguez P(4), Eckardt W(8)(9), Fruth B(6)(10), Herbinger 
I(11), Jones S(4)(12), Kuehl H(4)(13), Langergraber KE(14)(15), Lee 
K(4)(14)(15), Madinda NF(3)(4), Metzger S(3)(4), Ormsby LJ(4), Robbins MM(4), 
Sommer V(16)(17), Stoinski T(8)(9), Wessling EG(4)(18), Wittig RM(4), Yuh YG(4), 
Leendertz FH(3), Calvignac-Spencer S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
USA.
(2)Viral Evolution, Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Epidemiology of Highly Pathogenic Microorganisms, Robert Koch Institute, 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Budongo Conservation Field Station, Masindi, Uganda.
(6)School of Biological & Environmental Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(7)Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Stirling, Stirling, United 
Kingdom.
(8)Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(9)Department of Environmental Sciences and Program in Population Biology, 
Ecology and Evolution, Emory University, Druid Hills, GA, USA.
(10)Centre for Research and Conservation, Royal Zoological Society of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(11)WWF Germany, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, Centre for Conservation Science, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(13)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) 
Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(14)School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, AZ, USA.
(15)Institute of Human Origins, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(16)Department of Anthropology, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(17)Gashaka Primate Project, Serti/Taraba, Nigeria.
(18)Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Viruses closely related to human pathogens can reveal the origins of human 
infectious diseases. Human herpes simplexvirus type 1 (HSV-1) and type 2 (HSV-2) 
are hypothesized to have arisen via host-virus codivergence and cross-species 
transmission. We report the discovery of novel herpes simplexviruses during a 
large-scale screening of fecal samples from wild gorillas, bonobos, and 
chimpanzees. Phylogenetic analysis indicates that, contrary to expectation, 
simplexviruses from these African apes are all more closely related to HSV-2 
than to HSV-1. Molecular clock-based hypothesis testing suggests the divergence 
between HSV-1 and the African great ape simplexviruses likely represents a 
codivergence event between humans and gorillas. The simplexviruses infecting 
African great apes subsequently experienced multiple cross-species transmission 
events over the past 3 My, the most recent of which occurred between humans and 
bonobos around 1 Ma. These findings revise our understanding of the origins of 
human herpes simplexviruses and suggest that HSV-2 is one of the earliest 
zoonotic pathogens.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab072
PMCID: PMC8233514
PMID: 33720357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


967. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2831-2842. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab073.

Asexual Experimental Evolution of Yeast Does Not Curtail Transposable Elements.

Chen P(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.

Compared with asexual reproduction, sex facilitates the transmission of 
transposable elements (TEs) from one genome to another, but boosts the efficacy 
of selection against deleterious TEs. Thus, theoretically, it is unclear whether 
sex has a positive net effect on TE's proliferation. An empirical study 
concluded that sex is at the root of TE's evolutionary success because the yeast 
TE load was found to decrease rapidly in approximately 1,000 generations of 
asexual but not sexual experimental evolution. However, this finding contradicts 
the maintenance of TEs in natural yeast populations where sexual reproduction 
occurs extremely infrequently. Here, we show that the purported TE load 
reduction during asexual experimental evolution is likely an artifact of low 
genomic sequencing coverages. We observe stable TE loads in both sexual and 
asexual experimental evolution from multiple yeast data sets with sufficient 
coverages. To understand the evolutionary dynamics of yeast TEs, we turn to 
asexual mutation accumulation lines that have been under virtually no selection. 
We find that both TE transposition and excision rates per generation, but not 
their difference, tend to be higher in environments where yeast grows more 
slowly. However, the transposition rate is not significantly higher than the 
excision rate and the variance of the TE number among natural strains is close 
to its neutral expectation, suggesting that selection against TEs is at best 
weak in yeast. We conclude that the yeast TE load is maintained largely by a 
transposition-excision balance and that the influence of sex remains unclear.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab073
PMCID: PMC8233515
PMID: 33720342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


968. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2843-2853. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab074.

Experimental Resurrection of Ancestral Mammalian CPEB3 Ribozymes Reveals Deep 
Functional Conservation.

Bendixsen DP(1), Pollock TB(2), Peri G(1), Hayden EJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomolecular Sciences Graduate Programs, Boise State University, Boise, ID, 
USA.
(2)Department of Biological Science, Boise State University, Boise, ID, USA.

Self-cleaving ribozymes are genetic elements found in all domains of life, but 
their evolution remains poorly understood. A ribozyme located in the second 
intron of the cytoplasmic polyadenylation binding protein 3 gene (CPEB3) shows 
high sequence conservation in mammals, but little is known about the functional 
conservation of self-cleaving ribozyme activity across the mammalian tree of 
life or during the course of mammalian evolution. Here, we use a phylogenetic 
approach to design a mutational library and a deep sequencing assay to evaluate 
the in vitro self-cleavage activity of numerous extant and resurrected CPEB3 
ribozymes that span over 100 My of mammalian evolution. We found that the 
predicted sequence at the divergence of placentals and marsupials is highly 
active, and this activity has been conserved in most lineages. A reduction in 
ribozyme activity appears to have occurred multiple different times throughout 
the mammalian tree of life. The in vitro activity data allow an evaluation of 
the predicted mutational pathways leading to extant ribozyme as well as the 
mutational landscape surrounding these ribozymes. The results demonstrate that 
in addition to sequence conservation, the self-cleavage activity of the CPEB3 
ribozyme has persisted over millions of years of mammalian evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab074
PMCID: PMC8233481
PMID: 33720319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


969. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2854-2868. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab075.

Directed Evolution of an Enhanced POU Reprogramming Factor for Cell Fate 
Engineering.

Tan DS(1), Chen Y(2)(3), Gao Y(1), Bednarz A(1)(4), Wei Y(2), Malik V(2)(5), Ho 
DH(1), Weng M(1), Ho SY(1), Srivastava Y(2)(6), Velychko S(7), Yang X(2), Fan 
L(8)(9), Kim J(3), Graumann J(10), Stormo GD(11), Braun T(3), Yan J(8)(9), 
Schöler HR(7), Jauch R(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Genome Regulation Laboratory, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem 
Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Cardiac Development and Remodeling, Max-Planck-Institute for 
Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Leipzig, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine, Columbia Center for Human Development, Columbia Stem 
Cell Initiative, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(7)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for 
Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany.
(8)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
SAR, China.
(9)School of Medicine, Northwest University, Xi'an, China.
(10)Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Mass Spectrometry Service 
Group, Bad Nauheim, Germany.
(11)Department of Genetics, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, 
USA.

Transcription factor-driven cell fate engineering in pluripotency induction, 
transdifferentiation, and forward reprogramming requires efficiency, speed, and 
maturity for widespread adoption and clinical translation. Here, we used Oct4, 
Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc driven pluripotency reprogramming to evaluate methods for 
enhancing and tailoring cell fate transitions, through directed evolution with 
iterative screening of pooled mutant libraries and phenotypic selection. We 
identified an artificially evolved and enhanced POU factor (ePOU) that 
substantially outperforms wild-type Oct4 in terms of reprogramming speed and 
efficiency. In contrast to Oct4, not only can ePOU induce pluripotency with Sox2 
alone, but it can also do so in the absence of Sox2 in a three-factor 
ePOU/Klf4/c-Myc cocktail. Biochemical assays combined with genome-wide analyses 
showed that ePOU possesses a new preference to dimerize on palindromic DNA 
elements. Yet, the moderate capacity of Oct4 to function as a pioneer factor, 
its preference to bind octamer DNA and its capability to dimerize with Sox2 and 
Sox17 proteins remain unchanged in ePOU. Compared with Oct4, ePOU is 
thermodynamically stabilized and persists longer in reprogramming cells. In 
consequence, ePOU: 1) differentially activates several genes hitherto not 
implicated in reprogramming, 2) reveals an unappreciated role of 
thyrotropin-releasing hormone signaling, and 3) binds a distinct class of 
retrotransposons. Collectively, these features enable ePOU to accelerate the 
establishment of the pluripotency network. This demonstrates that the phenotypic 
selection of novel factor variants from mammalian cells with desired properties 
is key to advancing cell fate conversions with artificially evolved 
biomolecules.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab075
PMCID: PMC8233511
PMID: 33720298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


970. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2804-2817. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab070.

The Counteracting Effects of Demography on Functional Genomic Variation: The 
Roma Paradigm.

Font-Porterias N(1), Caro-Consuegra R(1), Lucas-Sánchez M(1), Lopez M(2), 
Giménez A(3), Carballo-Mesa A(4), Bosch E(1)(5), Calafell F(1), Quintana-Murci 
L(2)(6), Comas D(1).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Institut de Biologia 
Evolutiva (UPF-CSIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Human Evolutionary Genetics Unit, Institut Pasteur, UMR2000, CNRS, Paris, 
France.
(3)Facultat de Sociologia, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Facultat de Geografia i Història, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Reus, 
Spain.
(6)Human Genomics and Evolution, Collège de France, Paris, France.

Demographic history plays a major role in shaping the distribution of genomic 
variation. Yet the interaction between different demographic forces and their 
effects in the genomes is not fully resolved in human populations. Here, we 
focus on the Roma population, the largest transnational ethnic minority in 
Europe. They have a South Asian origin and their demographic history is 
characterized by recent dispersals, multiple founder events, and extensive gene 
flow from non-Roma groups. Through the analyses of new high-coverage whole exome 
sequences and genome-wide array data for 89 Iberian Roma individuals together 
with forward simulations, we show that founder effects have reduced their 
genetic diversity and proportion of rare variants, gene flow has counteracted 
the increase in mutational load, runs of homozygosity show ancestry-specific 
patterns of accumulation of deleterious homozygotes, and selection signals 
primarily derive from preadmixture adaptation in the Roma population sources. 
The present study shows how two demographic forces, bottlenecks and admixture, 
act in opposite directions and have long-term balancing effects on the Roma 
genomes. Understanding how demography and gene flow shape the genome of an 
admixed population provides an opportunity to elucidate how genomic variation is 
modeled in human populations.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab070
PMCID: PMC8233508
PMID: 33713133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


971. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2566-2581. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab052.

Males That Silence Their Father's Genes: Genomic Imprinting of a Complete 
Haploid Genome.

de la Filia AG(1), Mongue AJ(1), Dorrens J(1), Lemon H(1), Laetsch DR(1), Ross 
L.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Institute of Evolutionary Biology, The 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Genetic conflict is considered a key driver in the evolution of reproductive 
systems with non-Mendelian inheritance, where parents do not contribute equally 
to the genetic makeup of their offspring. One of the most extraordinary examples 
of non-Mendelian inheritance is paternal genome elimination (PGE), a form of 
haplodiploidy which has evolved repeatedly across arthropods. Under PGE, males 
are diploid but only transmit maternally inherited chromosomes, while the 
paternally inherited homologues are excluded from sperm. This asymmetric 
inheritance is thought to have evolved through an evolutionary arms race between 
the paternal and maternal genomes over transmission to future generations. In 
several PGE clades, such as the mealybugs (Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae), paternal 
chromosomes are not only eliminated from sperm, but also heterochromatinized 
early in development and thought to remain inactive, which could result from 
genetic conflict between parental genomes. Here, we present a parent-of-origin 
allele-specific transcriptome analysis in male mealybugs showing that expression 
is globally biased toward the maternal genome. However, up to 70% of somatically 
expressed genes are to some degree paternally expressed, while paternal genome 
expression is much more restricted in the male reproductive tract, with only 20% 
of genes showing paternal contribution. We also show that 
parent-of-origin-specific gene expression patterns are remarkably similar across 
genotypes, and that genes with completely biparental expression show elevated 
rates of molecular evolution. Our results provide the clearest example yet of 
genome-wide genomic imprinting in insects and enhance our understanding of PGE, 
which will aid future empirical tests of evolutionary theory regarding the 
origin of this unusual reproductive strategy.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab052
PMCID: PMC8136510
PMID: 33706381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


972. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2791-2803. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab069.

Kozak Sequence Acts as a Negative Regulator for De Novo Transcription Initiation 
of Newborn Coding Sequences in the Plant Genome.

Hata T(1)(2), Satoh S(1), Takada N(1), Matsuo M(2), Obokata J(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Kyoto Prefectural 
University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Agriculture, Setsunan University, Hirakata, Osaka, Japan.

The manner in which newborn coding sequences and their transcriptional 
competency emerge during the process of gene evolution remains unclear. Here, we 
experimentally simulated eukaryotic gene origination processes by mimicking 
horizontal gene transfer events in the plant genome. We mapped the precise 
position of the transcription start sites (TSSs) of hundreds of newly introduced 
promoterless firefly luciferase (LUC) coding sequences in the genome of 
Arabidopsis thaliana cultured cells. The systematic characterization of the 
LUC-TSSs revealed that 80% of them occurred under the influence of endogenous 
promoters, while the remainder underwent de novo activation in the intergenic 
regions, starting from pyrimidine-purine dinucleotides. These de novo TSSs 
obeyed unexpected rules; they predominantly occurred ∼100 bp upstream of the LUC 
inserts and did not overlap with Kozak-containing putative open reading frames 
(ORFs). These features were the output of the immediate responses to the 
sequence insertions, rather than a bias in the screening of the LUC gene 
function. Regarding the wild-type genic TSSs, they appeared to have evolved to 
lack any ORFs in their vicinities. Therefore, the repulsion by the de novo TSSs 
of Kozak-containing ORFs described above might be the first selection gate for 
the occurrence and evolution of TSSs in the plant genome. Based on these 
results, we characterized the de novo type of TSS identified in the plant genome 
and discuss its significance in genome evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab069
PMCID: PMC8233501
PMID: 33705557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


973. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3847-3863. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab025.

The Antibiotic Dosage of Fastest Resistance Evolution: Gene Amplifications 
Underpinning the Inverted-U.

Reding C(1), Catalán P(1)(2), Jansen G(3), Bergmiller T(1), Wood E(1), 
Rosenstiel P(4), Schulenburg H(5), Gudelj I(1), Beardmore R(1).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(2)Grupo Interdisciplinar de Sistemas Complejos (GISC), Departamento de 
Matemáticas, Universidad Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Molecular Health GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology (IKMB), CAU Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(5)Evolutionary Ecology and Genetics, Zoological Institute, CAU Kiel, Kiel, 
Germany.

To determine the dosage at which antibiotic resistance evolution is most rapid, 
we treated Escherichia coli in vitro, deploying the antibiotic erythromycin at 
dosages ranging from zero to high. Adaptation was fastest just below 
erythromycin's minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) and genotype-phenotype 
correlations determined from whole genome sequencing revealed the molecular 
basis: simultaneous selection for copy number variation in three resistance 
mechanisms which exhibited an "inverted-U" pattern of dose-dependence, as did 
several insertion sequences and an integron. Many genes did not conform to this 
pattern, however, reflecting changes in selection as dose increased: putative 
media adaptation polymorphisms at zero antibiotic dosage gave way to drug target 
(ribosomal RNA operon) amplification at mid dosages whereas prophage-mediated 
drug efflux amplifications dominated at the highest dosages. All treatments 
exhibited E. coli increases in the copy number of efflux operons acrAB and emrE 
at rates that correlated with increases in population density. For strains where 
the inverted-U was no longer observed following the genetic manipulation of 
acrAB, it could be recovered by prolonging the antibiotic treatment at subMIC 
dosages.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab025
PMCID: PMC8382913
PMID: 33693929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


974. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2615-2626. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab056.

Reconstruction of the Origin of a Neo-Y Sex Chromosome and Its Evolution in the 
Spotted Knifejaw, Oplegnathus punctatus.

Li M(1)(2)(3), Zhang R(4), Fan G(4), Xu W(1)(3), Zhou Q(1)(3), Wang L(1)(3), Li 
W(5), Pang Z(5), Yu M(4), Liu Q(4), Liu X(4), Schartl M(6)(7), Chen S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, CAFS; Laboratory for Marine 
Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Pilot National Laboratory for 
Marine Science and Technology (Qingdao), Qingdao, China.
(2)College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, 
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Sustainable Development of Marine Fisheries, Ministry of 
Agriculture, Qingdao, China.
(4)BGI-Qingdao, BGI-Shenzhen, Qingdao, China.
(5)Laizhou Mingbo Aquatic Product Co. Ltd., Laizhou, Shandong, China.
(6)Entwicklungsbiochemie, University of Würzburg, Biozentrum, Würzburg, Germany.
(7)Xiphophorus Genetic Stock Center, Texas State University, San Marcos, TX, 
USA.

Sex chromosomes are a peculiar constituent of the genome because the 
evolutionary forces that fix the primary sex-determining gene cause genic 
degeneration and accumulation of junk DNA in the heterogametic partner. One of 
the most spectacular phenomena in sex chromosome evolution is the occurrence of 
neo-Y chromosomes, which lead to X1X2Y sex-determining systems. Such neo-sex 
chromosomes are critical for understanding the processes of sex chromosome 
evolution because they rejuvenate their total gene content. We assembled the 
male and female genomes at the chromosome level of the spotted knifejaw 
(Oplegnathus punctatus), which has a cytogenetically recognized neo-Y 
chromosome. The full assembly and annotation of all three sex chromosomes 
allowed us to reconstruct their evolutionary history. Contrary to other neo-Y 
chromosomes, the fusion to X2 is quite ancient, estimated at 48 Ma. Despite its 
old age and being even older in the X1 homologous region which carries a huge 
inversion that occurred as early as 55-48 Ma, genetic degeneration of the neo-Y 
appears to be only moderate. Transcriptomic analysis showed that sex chromosomes 
harbor 87 genes, which may serve important functions in the testis. The 
accumulation of such male-beneficial genes, a large inversion on the X1 
homologous region and fusion to X2 appear to be the main drivers of neo-Y 
evolution in the spotted knifejaw. The availability of high-quality assemblies 
of the neo-Y and both X chromosomes make this fish an ideal model for a better 
understanding of the variability of sex determination mechanisms and of sex 
chromosome evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab056
PMCID: PMC8136494
PMID: 33693787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


975. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2958-2966. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab062.

Higher Rates of Processed Pseudogene Acquisition in Humans and Three Great Apes 
Revealed by Long-Read Assemblies.

Feng X(1)(2), Li H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Data Sciences, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.

LINE-1-mediated retrotransposition of protein-coding mRNAs is an active process 
in modern humans for both germline and somatic genomes. Prior works that 
surveyed human data mostly relied on detecting discordant mappings of paired-end 
short reads, or exon junctions contained in short reads. Moreover, there have 
been few genome-wide comparisons between gene retrocopies in great apes and 
humans. In this study, we introduced a more sensitive and accurate method to 
identify processed pseudogenes. Our method utilizes long-read assemblies, and 
more importantly, is able to provide full-length retrocopy sequences as well as 
flanking regions which are missed by short-read based methods. From 22 human 
individuals, we pinpointed 40 processed pseudogenes that are not present in the 
human reference genome GRCh38 and identified 17 pseudogenes that are in GRCh38 
but absent from some input individuals. This represents a significantly higher 
discovery rate than previous reports (39 pseudogenes not in the reference genome 
out of 939 individuals). We also provided an overview of lineage-specific 
retrocopies in chimpanzee, gorilla, and orangutan genomes.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 2021. This work is written by US Government employees and 
is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab062
PMCID: PMC8661421
PMID: 33681998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


976. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2750-2766. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab063.

Extensive Genome-Wide Phylogenetic Discordance Is Due to Incomplete Lineage 
Sorting and Not Ongoing Introgression in a Rapidly Radiated Bryophyte Genus.

Meleshko O(1), Martin MD(1), Korneliussen TS(2), Schröck C(3), Lamkowski P(4), 
Schmutz J(5)(6), Healey A(6), Piatkowski BT(7), Shaw AJ(7), Weston DJ(8)(9), 
Flatberg KI(1), Szövényi P(10), Hassel K(1), Stenøien HK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Natural History, NTNU University Museum, Norwegian University 
of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(3)Biology Centre of the Upper Austrian State Museum, Linz, Austria.
(4)Institute of Botany and Landscape Ecology, University of Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(5)United States Department of Energy, Joint Genome Institute, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(6)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, USA.
(7)Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(8)Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.
(9)Climate Change Science Institute, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 
TN, USA.
(10)Department of Systematic and Evolutionary Botany & Zurich-Basel Plant 
Science Center, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

The relative importance of introgression for diversification has long been a 
highly disputed topic in speciation research and remains an open question 
despite the great attention it has received over the past decade. Gene flow 
leaves traces in the genome similar to those created by incomplete lineage 
sorting (ILS), and identification and quantification of gene flow in the 
presence of ILS is challenging and requires knowledge about the true 
phylogenetic relationship among the species. We use whole nuclear, plastid, and 
organellar genomes from 12 species in the rapidly radiated, ecologically 
diverse, actively hybridizing genus of peatmoss (Sphagnum) to reconstruct the 
species phylogeny and quantify introgression using a suite of phylogenomic 
methods. We found extensive phylogenetic discordance among nuclear and 
organellar phylogenies, as well as across the nuclear genome and the nodes in 
the species tree, best explained by extensive ILS following the rapid radiation 
of the genus rather than by postspeciation introgression. Our analyses support 
the idea of ancient introgression among the ancestral lineages followed by ILS, 
whereas recent gene flow among the species is highly restricted despite 
widespread interspecific hybridization known in the group. Our results 
contribute to phylogenomic understanding of how speciation proceeds in rapidly 
radiated, actively hybridizing species groups, and demonstrate that employing a 
combination of diverse phylogenomic methods can facilitate untangling complex 
phylogenetic patterns created by ILS and introgression.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab063
PMCID: PMC8233498
PMID: 33681996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


977. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2732-2749. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab061.

The Genomic Architecture of Adaptation to Larval Malnutrition Points to a 
Trade-off with Adult Starvation Resistance in Drosophila.

Kawecki TJ(1), Erkosar B(1), Dupuis C(1), Hollis B(2)(3), Stillwell RC(1), Kapun 
M(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)EPFL, Department of Systems Biology, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, 
SC, USA.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.

Periods of nutrient shortage impose strong selection on animal populations. 
Experimental studies of genetic adaptation to nutrient shortage largely focus on 
resistance to acute starvation at adult stage; it is not clear how conclusions 
drawn from these studies extrapolate to other forms of nutritional stress. We 
studied the genomic signature of adaptation to chronic juvenile malnutrition in 
six populations of Drosophila melanogaster evolved for 150 generations on an 
extremely nutrient-poor larval diet. Comparison with control populations evolved 
on standard food revealed repeatable genomic differentiation between the two set 
of population, involving >3,000 candidate SNPs forming >100 independently 
evolving clusters. The candidate genomic regions were enriched in genes 
implicated in hormone, carbohydrate, and lipid metabolism, including some with 
known effects on fitness-related life-history traits. Rather than being close to 
fixation, a substantial fraction of candidate SNPs segregated at intermediate 
allele frequencies in all malnutrition-adapted populations. This, together with 
patterns of among-population variation in allele frequencies and estimates of 
Tajima's D, suggests that the poor diet results in balancing selection on some 
genomic regions. Our candidate genes for tolerance to larval malnutrition showed 
a high overlap with genes previously implicated in acute starvation resistance. 
However, adaptation to larval malnutrition in our study was associated with 
reduced tolerance to acute adult starvation. Thus, rather than reflecting 
synergy, the shared genomic architecture appears to mediate an evolutionary 
trade-off between tolerances to these two forms of nutritional stress.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab061
PMCID: PMC8233504
PMID: 33677563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


978. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2715-2731. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab060.

Identifying Primate ACE2 Variants That Confer Resistance to SARS-CoV-2.

Bhattacharjee MJ(1), Lin JJ(2), Chang CY(2), Chiou YT(3), Li TN(3), Tai CW(2), 
Shiu TF(2), Chen CA(2)(4), Chou CY(5), Chakraborty P(6), Tseng YY(5), Wang 
LH(3), Li WH(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Life Science Division, Institute of Advanced Study in Science and Technology, 
Guwahati, Assam, India.
(2)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua University, 
Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(4)Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, National Taiwan University and 
Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, School of Medicine, Wayne State 
University, Detroit, MI, USA.
(6)Department of Biotechnology, Assam University, Silchar, Assam, India.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

SARS-CoV-2 infects humans through the binding of viral S-protein (spike protein) 
to human angiotensin I converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). The structure of the 
ACE2-S-protein complex has been deciphered and we focused on the 27 ACE2 
residues that bind to S-protein. From human sequence databases, we identified 
nine ACE2 variants at ACE2-S-protein binding sites. We used both experimental 
assays and protein structure analysis to evaluate the effect of each variant on 
the binding affinity of ACE2 to S-protein. We found one variant causing complete 
binding disruption, two and three variants, respectively, strongly and mildly 
reducing the binding affinity, and two variants strongly enhancing the binding 
affinity. We then collected the ACE2 gene sequences from 57 nonhuman primates. 
Among the 6 apes and 20 Old World monkeys (OWMs) studied, we found no new 
variants. In contrast, all 11 New World monkeys (NWMs) studied share four 
variants each causing a strong reduction in binding affinity, the Philippine 
tarsier also possesses three such variants, and 18 of the 19 prosimian species 
studied share one variant causing a strong reduction in binding affinity. 
Moreover, one OWM and three prosimian variants increased binding affinity by 
>50%. Based on these findings, we proposed that the common ancestor of primates 
was strongly resistant to and that of NWMs was completely resistant to 
SARS-CoV-2 and so is the Philippine tarsier, whereas apes and OWMs, like most 
humans, are susceptible. This study increases our understanding of the 
differences in susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection among primates.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab060
PMCID: PMC7989403
PMID: 33674876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


979. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2704-2714. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab059.

Convergent Biochemical Pathways for Xanthine Alkaloid Production in Plants 
Evolved from Ancestral Enzymes with Different Catalytic Properties.

O'Donnell AJ(1), Huang R(1), Barboline JJ(1), Barkman TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, 
MI, USA.

Convergent evolution is widespread but the extent to which common ancestral 
conditions are necessary to facilitate the independent acquisition of similar 
traits remains unclear. In order to better understand how ancestral biosynthetic 
catalytic capabilities might lead to convergent evolution of similar modern-day 
biochemical pathways, we resurrected ancient enzymes of the caffeine synthase 
(CS) methyltransferases that are responsible for theobromine and caffeine 
production in flowering plants. Ancestral CS enzymes of Theobroma, Paullinia, 
and Camellia exhibited similar substrate preferences but these resulted in the 
formation of different sets of products. From these ancestral enzymes, 
descendants with similar substrate preference and product formation 
independently evolved after gene duplication events in Theobroma and Paullinia. 
Thus, it appears that the convergent modern-day pathways likely originated from 
ancestral pathways with different inferred flux. Subsequently, the modern-day 
enzymes originated independently via gene duplication and their convergent 
catalytic characteristics evolved to partition the multiple ancestral activities 
by different mutations that occurred in homologous regions of the ancestral 
proteins. These results show that even when modern-day pathways and recruited 
genes are similar, the antecedent conditions may be distinctive such that 
different evolutionary steps are required to generate convergence.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab059
PMCID: PMC8233510
PMID: 33662138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


980. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2967-2985. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab047.

Biases in Demographic Modeling Affect Our Understanding of Recent Divergence.

Momigliano P(1), Florin AB(2), Merilä J(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Ecological Genetics Research Unit, Organismal and Evolutionary Biology 
Research Programme, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Aquatic Resources, Institute of Coastal Research, Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences, Öregrund, Sweden.
(3)Division of Ecology and Biodiversity, Faculty of Science, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR.

Testing among competing demographic models of divergence has become an important 
component of evolutionary research in model and non-model organisms. However, 
the effect of unaccounted demographic events on model choice and parameter 
estimation remains largely unexplored. Using extensive simulations, we 
demonstrate that under realistic divergence scenarios, failure to account for 
population size (Ne) changes in daughter and ancestral populations leads to 
strong biases in divergence time estimates as well as model choice. We 
illustrate these issues reconstructing the recent demographic history of North 
Sea and Baltic Sea turbots (Scophthalmus maximus) by testing 16 isolation with 
migration (IM) and 16 secondary contact (SC) scenarios, modeling changes in Ne 
as well as the effects of linked selection and barrier loci. Failure to account 
for changes in Ne resulted in selecting SC models with long periods of strict 
isolation and divergence times preceding the formation of the Baltic Sea. In 
contrast, models accounting for Ne changes suggest recent (<6 kya) divergence 
with constant gene flow. We further show how interpreting genomic landscapes of 
differentiation can help discerning among competing models. For example, in the 
turbot data, islands of differentiation show signatures of recent selective 
sweeps, rather than old divergence resisting secondary introgression. The 
results have broad implications for the study of population divergence by 
highlighting the potential effects of unmodeled changes in Ne on demographic 
inference. Tested models should aim at representing realistic divergence 
scenarios for the target taxa, and extreme caution should always be exercised 
when interpreting results of demographic modeling.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab047
PMCID: PMC8233503
PMID: 33624816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


981. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2627-2638. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab057.

Parallel Genomic Changes Drive Repeated Evolution of Placentas in Live-Bearing 
Fish.

van Kruistum H(1)(2), Nijland R(3), Reznick DN(4), Groenen MAM(1), Megens 
HJ(1)(5), Pollux BJA(2).

Author information:
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Experimental Zoology Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Marine Animal Ecology Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Biology, University of California, Riverside, CA, USA.
(5)Aquaculture and Fisheries Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.

The evolutionary origin of complex organs challenges empirical study because 
most organs evolved hundreds of millions of years ago. The placenta of 
live-bearing fish in the family Poeciliidae represents a unique opportunity to 
study the evolutionary origin of complex organs, because in this family a 
placenta evolved at least nine times independently. It is currently unknown 
whether this repeated evolution is accompanied by similar, repeated, genomic 
changes in placental species. Here, we compare whole genomes of 26 poeciliid 
species representing six out of nine independent origins of placentation. 
Evolutionary rate analysis revealed that the evolution of the placenta coincides 
with convergent shifts in the evolutionary rate of 78 protein-coding genes, 
mainly observed in transporter- and vesicle-located genes. Furthermore, 
differences in sequence conservation showed that placental evolution coincided 
with similar changes in 76 noncoding regulatory elements, occurring primarily 
around genes that regulate development. The unexpected high occurrence of GATA 
simple repeats in the regulatory elements suggests an important function for 
GATA repeats in developmental gene regulation. The distinction in molecular 
evolution observed, with protein-coding parallel changes more often found in 
metabolic and structural pathways, compared with regulatory change more 
frequently found in developmental pathways, offers a compelling model for 
complex trait evolution in general: changing the regulation of otherwise highly 
conserved developmental genes may allow for the evolution of complex traits.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab057
PMCID: PMC8136483
PMID: 33620468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


982. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2582-2596. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab053.

Adaptive Admixture of HLA Class I Allotypes Enhanced Genetically Determined 
Strength of Natural Killer Cells in East Asians.

Deng Z(1)(2), Zhen J(1)(3), Harrison GF(4), Zhang G(1), Chen R(1), Sun G(1), Yu 
Q(1), Nemat-Gorgani N(5), Guethlein LA(5), He L(1), Tang M(6), Gao X(7), Cai 
S(1), Palmer WH(4), Shortt JA(4), Gignoux CR(4), Carrington M(8), Zou H(1), 
Parham P(5), Hong W(9), Norman PJ(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)Immunogenetics Laboratory, Shenzhen Blood Center, Shenzhen, Guangdong, P. R. 
China.
(2)Department of Transfusion Medicine, School of Laboratory Medicine and 
Biotechnology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P. R. China.
(3)Central Laboratory, Shenzhen Baoan Women's and Children's Hospital, Shenzhen, 
Guangdong, P. R. China.
(4)Division of Biomedical Informatics and Personalized Medicine, University of 
Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(5)Department of Structural Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(6)Clinical Laboratory, Wuzhou Red Cross Hospital, Wuzhou, Guangxi, P. R. China.
(7)Inflammatory Cell Dynamics Section, Laboratory of Integrative Cancer 
Immunology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Basic Science Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research 
(FNLCR), Frederick, MD21702, and Ragon Institute of MGH, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Shenzhen Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Shenzhen Blood Center, Shenzhen, 
Guangdong, P. R. China.
(10)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado, Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

Human natural killer (NK) cells are essential for controlling infection, cancer, 
and fetal development. NK cell functions are modulated by interactions between 
polymorphic inhibitory killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) and 
polymorphic HLA-A, -B, and -C ligands expressed on tissue cells. All HLA-C 
alleles encode a KIR ligand and contribute to reproduction and immunity. In 
contrast, only some HLA-A and -B alleles encode KIR ligands and they focus on 
immunity. By high-resolution analysis of KIR and HLA-A, -B, and -C genes, we 
show that the Chinese Southern Han (CHS) are significantly enriched for 
interactions between inhibitory KIR and HLA-A and -B. This enrichment has had 
substantial input through population admixture with neighboring populations, who 
contributed HLA class I haplotypes expressing the KIR ligands B*46:01 and 
B*58:01, which subsequently rose to high frequency by natural selection. 
Consequently, over 80% of Southern Han HLA haplotypes encode more than one KIR 
ligand. Complementing the high number of KIR ligands, the CHS KIR locus combines 
a high frequency of genes expressing potent inhibitory KIR, with a low frequency 
of those expressing activating KIR. The Southern Han centromeric KIR region 
encodes strong, conserved, inhibitory HLA-C-specific receptors, and the 
telomeric region provides a high number and diversity of inhibitory HLA-A and 
-B-specific receptors. In all these characteristics, the CHS represent other 
East Asians, whose NK cell repertoires are thus enhanced in quantity, diversity, 
and effector strength, likely augmenting resistance to endemic viral infections.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab053
PMCID: PMC8136484
PMID: 33616658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


983. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2597-2614. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab054.

Mitonuclear Coevolution, but not Nuclear Compensation, Drives Evolution of 
OXPHOS Complexes in Bivalves.

Piccinini G(1), Iannello M(1), Puccio G(1), Plazzi F(1), Havird JC(2), Ghiselli 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University 
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 
USA.

In Metazoa, four out of five complexes involved in oxidative phosphorylation 
(OXPHOS) are formed by subunits encoded by both the mitochondrial (mtDNA) and 
nuclear (nuDNA) genomes, leading to the expectation of mitonuclear coevolution. 
Previous studies have supported coadaptation of mitochondria-encoded (mtOXPHOS) 
and nuclear-encoded OXPHOS (nuOXPHOS) subunits, often specifically interpreted 
with regard to the "nuclear compensation hypothesis," a specific form of 
mitonuclear coevolution where nuclear genes compensate for deleterious 
mitochondrial mutations due to less efficient mitochondrial selection. In this 
study, we analyzed patterns of sequence evolution of 79 OXPHOS subunits in 31 
bivalve species, a taxon showing extraordinary mtDNA variability and including 
species with "doubly uniparental" mtDNA inheritance. Our data showed strong and 
clear signals of mitonuclear coevolution. NuOXPHOS subunits had concordant 
topologies with mtOXPHOS subunits, contrary to previous phylogenies based on 
nuclear genes lacking mt interactions. Evolutionary rates between mt and 
nuOXPHOS subunits were also highly correlated compared with 
non-OXPHO-interacting nuclear genes. Nuclear subunits of chimeric OXPHOS 
complexes (I, III, IV, and V) also had higher dN/dS ratios than Complex II, 
which is formed exclusively by nuDNA-encoded subunits. However, we did not find 
evidence of nuclear compensation: mitochondria-encoded subunits showed similar 
dN/dS ratios compared with nuclear-encoded subunits, contrary to most previously 
studied bilaterian animals. Moreover, no site-specific signals of compensatory 
positive selection were detected in nuOXPHOS genes. Our analyses extend the 
evidence for mitonuclear coevolution to a new taxonomic group, but we propose a 
reconsideration of the nuclear compensation hypothesis.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab054
PMCID: PMC8136519
PMID: 33616640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


984. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2547-2565. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab049.

Comparative Genomics Reveals Early Emergence and Biased Spatiotemporal 
Distribution of SARS-CoV-2.

Chiara M(1)(2), Horner DS(1)(2), Gissi C(2)(3), Pesole G(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnologies, 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Bari, Italy.
(3)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Biopharmaceutics, University of 
Bari A. Moro, Bari,Italy.

Effective systems for the analysis of molecular data are fundamental for 
monitoring the spread of infectious diseases and studying pathogen evolution. 
The rapid identification of emerging viral strains, and/or genetic variants 
potentially associated with novel phenotypic features is one of the most 
important objectives of genomic surveillance of human pathogens and represents 
one of the first lines of defense for the control of their spread. During the 
COVID 19 pandemic, several taxonomic frameworks have been proposed for the 
classification of SARS-Cov-2 isolates. These systems, which are typically based 
on phylogenetic approaches, represent essential tools for epidemiological 
studies as well as contributing to the study of the origin of the outbreak. 
Here, we propose an alternative, reproducible, and transparent phenetic method 
to study changes in SARS-CoV-2 genomic diversity over time. We suggest that our 
approach can complement other systems and facilitate the identification of 
biologically relevant variants in the viral genome. To demonstrate the validity 
of our approach, we present comparative genomic analyses of more than 175,000 
genomes. Our method delineates 22 distinct SARS-CoV-2 haplogroups, which, based 
on the distribution of high-frequency genetic variants, fall into four major 
macrohaplogroups. We highlight biased spatiotemporal distributions of SARS-CoV-2 
genetic profiles and show that seven of the 22 haplogroups (and of all of the 
four haplogroup clusters) showed a broad geographic distribution within China by 
the time the outbreak was widely recognized-suggesting early emergence and 
widespread cryptic circulation of the virus well before its isolation in January 
2020. General patterns of genomic variability are remarkably similar within all 
major SARS-CoV-2 haplogroups, with UTRs consistently exhibiting the greatest 
variability, with s2m, a conserved secondary structure element of unknown 
function in the 3'-UTR of the viral genome showing evidence of a functional 
shift. Although several polymorphic sites that are specific to one or more 
haplogroups were predicted to be under positive or negative selection, overall 
our analyses suggest that the emergence of novel types is unlikely to be driven 
by convergent evolution and independent fixation of advantageous substitutions, 
or by selection of recombined strains. In the absence of extensive clinical 
metadata for most available genome sequences, and in the context of extensive 
geographic and temporal biases in the sampling, many questions regarding the 
evolution and clinical characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 isolates remain open. 
However, our data indicate that the approach outlined here can be usefully 
employed in the identification of candidate SARS-CoV-2 genetic variants of 
clinical and epidemiological importance.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab049
PMCID: PMC7928790
PMID: 33605421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


985. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2179-2190. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab051.

Suboptimal Intermediates Underlie Evolution of the Bicoid Homeodomain.

Onal P(1), Gunasinghe HI(1), Umezawa KY(1), Zheng M(1), Ling J(1), Azeez L(1), 
Dalmeus A(1), Tazin T(1), Small S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, NY, USA.

Changes in regulatory networks generate materials for evolution to create 
phenotypic diversity. For transcription networks, multiple studies have shown 
that alterations in binding sites of cis-regulatory elements correlate well with 
the gain or loss of specific features of the body plan. Less is known about 
alterations in the amino acid sequences of the transcription factors (TFs) that 
bind these elements. Here we study the evolution of Bicoid (Bcd), a homeodomain 
(HD) protein that is critical for anterior embryo patterning in Drosophila. The 
ancestor of Bcd (AncBcd) emerged after a duplication of a Zerknullt (Zen)-like 
ancestral protein (AncZB) in a suborder of flies. AncBcd diverged from AncZB, 
gaining novel transcriptional and translational activities. We focus on the 
evolution of the HD of AncBcd, which binds to DNA and RNA, and is comprised of 
four subdomains: an N-terminal arm (NT) and three helices; H1, H2, and 
Recognition Helix (RH). Using chimeras of subdomains and gene rescue assays in 
Drosophila, we show that robust patterning activity of the Bcd HD (high 
frequency rescue to adulthood) is achieved only when amino acid substitutions in 
three separate subdomains (NT, H1, and RH) are combined. Other combinations of 
subdomains also yield full rescue, but with lower penetrance, suggesting 
alternative suboptimal activities. Our results suggest a multistep pathway for 
the evolution of the Bcd HD that involved intermediate HD sequences with 
suboptimal activities, which constrained and enabled further evolutionary 
changes. They also demonstrate critical epistatic forces that contribute to the 
robust function of a DNA-binding domain.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab051
PMCID: PMC8136501
PMID: 33599280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


986. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2337-2350. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab029.

Herbicide Selection Promotes Antibiotic Resistance in Soil Microbiomes.

Liao H(1), Li X(1), Yang Q(1), Bai Y(1), Cui P(1), Wen C(1), Liu C(1), Chen 
Z(1), Tang J(1), Che J(1), Yu Z(2), Geisen S(3), Zhou S(1), Friman VP(4), Zhu 
YG(5).

Author information:
(1)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Soil Environmental Health and Regulation, 
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry 
University, Fuzhou 350002, China.
(2)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Integrated Agro-environmental Pollution Control 
and Management, Guangdong Institute of Eco-environmental Science & Technology, 
Guangzhou 510650, China.
(3)Laboratory of Nematology, Wageningen University, Wageningen 6700AA, 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Biology, University of York, Wentworth Way, York YO10 5DD, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Key Lab of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban Environment, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen 361021, China.

Herbicides are one of the most widely used chemicals in agriculture. While they 
are known to be harmful to nontarget organisms, the effects of herbicides on the 
composition and functioning of soil microbial communities remain unclear. Here 
we show that application of three widely used herbicides-glyphosate, 
glufosinate, and dicamba-increase the prevalence of antibiotic resistance genes 
(ARGs) and mobile genetic elements (MGEs) in soil microbiomes without clear 
changes in the abundance, diversity and composition of bacterial communities. 
Mechanistically, these results could be explained by a positive selection for 
more tolerant genotypes that acquired several mutations in previously 
well-characterized herbicide and ARGs. Moreover, herbicide exposure increased 
cell membrane permeability and conjugation frequency of multidrug resistance 
plasmids, promoting ARG movement between bacteria. A similar pattern was found 
in agricultural soils across 11 provinces in China, where herbicide application, 
and the levels of glyphosate residues in soils, were associated with increased 
ARG and MGE abundances relative to herbicide-free control sites. Together, our 
results show that herbicide application can enrich ARGs and MGEs by changing the 
genetic composition of soil microbiomes, potentially contributing to the global 
antimicrobial resistance problem in agricultural environments.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab029
PMCID: PMC8136491
PMID: 33592098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


987. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2380-2395. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab033.

B2 SINE Copies Serve as a Transposable Boundary of DNA Methylation and Histone 
Modifications in the Mouse.

Ichiyanagi T(1), Katoh H(1), Mori Y(1), Hirafuku K(2), Boyboy BA(1), Kawase 
M(1), Ichiyanagi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genome and Epigenome Dynamics, Department of Animal Sciences, 
Graduate School of Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, 
Japan.
(2)The Jikei University Hospital, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-8471, Japan.

More than one million copies of short interspersed elements (SINEs), a class of 
retrotransposons, are present in the mammalian genomes, particularly within 
gene-rich genomic regions. Evidence has accumulated that ancient SINE sequences 
have acquired new binding sites for transcription factors (TFs) through multiple 
mutations following retrotransposition, and as a result have rewired the host 
regulatory network during the course of evolution. However, it remains unclear 
whether currently active SINEs contribute to the expansion of TF binding sites. 
To study the mobility, expression, and function of SINE copies, we first 
identified about 2,000 insertional polymorphisms of SINE B1 and B2 families 
within Mus musculus. Using a novel RNA sequencing method designated as 
melRNA-seq, we detected the expression of SINEs in male germ cells at both the 
subfamily and genomic copy levels: the vast majority of B1 RNAs originated from 
evolutionarily young subfamilies, whereas B2 RNAs originated from both young and 
old subfamilies. DNA methylation and chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing 
(ChIP-seq) analyses in liver revealed that polymorphic B2 insertions served as a 
boundary element inhibiting the expansion of DNA hypomethylated and histone 
hyperacetylated regions, and decreased the expression of neighboring genes. 
Moreover, genomic B2 copies were enriched at the boundary of various histone 
modifications, and chromatin insulator protein, CCCTC-binding factor, a 
well-known chromatin boundary protein, bound to >100 polymorphic and >10,000 
non-polymorphic B2 insertions. These results suggest that the currently active 
B2 copies are mobile boundary elements that can modulate chromatin modifications 
and gene expression, and are likely involved in epigenomic and phenotypic 
diversification of the mouse species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab033
PMCID: PMC8136502
PMID: 33592095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


988. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2366-2379. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab032.

Recent Evolutionary History of Tigers Highlights Contrasting Roles of Genetic 
Drift and Selection.

Armstrong EE(1), Khan A(2), Taylor RW(3)(4), Gouy A(5)(6), Greenbaum G(3)(7), 
Thiéry A(5)(6), Kang JT(3)(8), Redondo SA(3), Prost S(3), Barsh G(9)(10), Kaelin 
C(10), Phalke S(11), Chugani A(11), Gilbert M(1)(12), Miquelle D(1), Zachariah 
A(13), Borthakur U(14), Reddy A(15), Louis E(16), Ryder OA(17), Jhala YV(18), 
Petrov D(3), Excoffier L(5)(6), Hadly E(1), Ramakrishnan U(2).

Author information:
(1)Wildlife Conservation Society, Russia Program, New York, NY, USA.
(2)National Centre for Biological Sciences, TIFR, Bangalore, India.
(3)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)End2End Genomics, LLC, Davis, CA, USA.
(5)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Ecology, Evolution & Behavior, The Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(8)Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR, Singapore.
(9)Hudsonalpha Institute, Hunstville, AL, USA.
(10)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(11)Medgenome Labs Limited, Bangalore, India.
(12)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(13)Kerala Forest Department, Waynad, India.
(14)Aranyak, Guwahati, India.
(15)Laboratory for Conservation of Endangered Species, CCMB, Hyderabad, India.
(16)Department of Genetics, Omaha Zoo, Omaha, NE, USA.
(17)San Diego Zoo, Institute for Conservation Research, Escondido, CA, USA.
(18)Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, India.

Species conservation can be improved by knowledge of evolutionary and genetic 
history. Tigers are among the most charismatic of endangered species and garner 
significant conservation attention. However, their evolutionary history and 
genomic variation remain poorly known, especially for Indian tigers. With 70% of 
the world's wild tigers living in India, such knowledge is critical. We 
re-sequenced 65 individual tiger genomes representing most extant subspecies 
with a specific focus on tigers from India. As suggested by earlier studies, we 
found strong genetic differentiation between the putative tiger subspecies. 
Despite high total genomic diversity in India, individual tigers host longer 
runs of homozygosity, potentially suggesting recent inbreeding or founding 
events, possibly due to small and fragmented protected areas. We suggest the 
impacts of ongoing connectivity loss on inbreeding and persistence of Indian 
tigers be closely monitored. Surprisingly, demographic models suggest recent 
divergence (within the last 20,000 years) between subspecies and strong 
population bottlenecks. Amur tiger genomes revealed the strongest signals of 
selection related to metabolic adaptation to cold, whereas Sumatran tigers show 
evidence of weak selection for genes involved in body size regulation. We 
recommend detailed investigation of local adaptation in Amur and Sumatran tigers 
prior to initiating genetic rescue.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab032
PMCID: PMC8136513
PMID: 33592092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


989. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2986-3003. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab050.

The Impact of Purifying and Background Selection on the Inference of Population 
History: Problems and Prospects.

Johri P(1), Riall K(1), Becher H(2), Excoffier L(3)(4), Charlesworth B(2), 
Jensen JD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(2)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Berne, Berne, Switzerland.
(4)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2021 Jan 18;:

Current procedures for inferring population history generally assume complete 
neutrality-that is, they neglect both direct selection and the effects of 
selection on linked sites. We here examine how the presence of direct purifying 
selection and background selection may bias demographic inference by evaluating 
two commonly-used methods (MSMC and fastsimcoal2), specifically studying how the 
underlying shape of the distribution of fitness effects and the fraction of 
directly selected sites interact with demographic parameter estimation. The 
results show that, even after masking functional genomic regions, background 
selection may cause the mis-inference of population growth under models of both 
constant population size and decline. This effect is amplified as the strength 
of purifying selection and the density of directly selected sites increases, as 
indicated by the distortion of the site frequency spectrum and levels of 
nucleotide diversity at linked neutral sites. We also show how simulated changes 
in background selection effects caused by population size changes can be 
predicted analytically. We propose a potential method for correcting for the 
mis-inference of population growth caused by selection. By treating the 
distribution of fitness effect as a nuisance parameter and averaging across all 
potential realizations, we demonstrate that even directly selected sites can be 
used to infer demographic histories with reasonable accuracy.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab050
PMCID: PMC8233493
PMID: 33591322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


990. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2532-2546. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab048.

Behavioral and Genomic Sensory Adaptations Underlying the Pest Activity of 
Drosophila suzukii.

Durkin SM(1)(2), Chakraborty M(3), Abrieux A(4), Lewald KM(4), Gadau A(1), 
Svetec N(1), Peng J(1), Kopyto M(1), Langer CB(1), Chiu JC(4), Emerson JJ(3), 
Zhao L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics and Genomics, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology and Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 
Irvine, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Entomology and Nematology, College of Agricultural and 
Environmental Sciences, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA.

Studying how novel phenotypes originate and evolve is fundamental to the field 
of evolutionary biology as it allows us to understand how organismal diversity 
is generated and maintained. However, determining the basis of novel phenotypes 
is challenging as it involves orchestrated changes at multiple biological 
levels. Here, we aim to overcome this challenge by using a comparative species 
framework combining behavioral, gene expression, and genomic analyses to 
understand the evolutionary novel egg-laying substrate-choice behavior of the 
invasive pest species Drosophila suzukii. First, we used egg-laying behavioral 
assays to understand the evolution of ripe fruit oviposition preference in 
D. suzukii compared with closely related species D. subpulchrella and 
D. biarmipes as well as D. melanogaster. We show that D. subpulchrella and 
D. biarmipes lay eggs on both ripe and rotten fruits, suggesting that the 
transition to ripe fruit preference was gradual. Second, using two-choice 
oviposition assays, we studied how D. suzukii, D. subpulchrella, D. biarmipes, 
and D. melanogaster differentially process key sensory cues distinguishing ripe 
from rotten fruit during egg-laying. We found that D. suzukii's preference for 
ripe fruit is in part mediated through a species-specific preference for stiff 
substrates. Last, we sequenced and annotated a high-quality genome for D. 
subpulchrella. Using comparative genomic approaches, we identified candidate 
genes involved in D. suzukii's ability to seek out and target ripe fruits. Our 
results provide detail to the stepwise evolution of pest activity in D. suzukii, 
indicating important cues used by this species when finding a host, and the 
molecular mechanisms potentially underlying their adaptation to a new ecological 
niche.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab048
PMCID: PMC8136512
PMID: 33586767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


991. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2513-2519. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab045.

The Transcriptional and Splicing Changes Caused by Hybridization Can Be Globally 
Recovered by Genome Doubling during Allopolyploidization.

Qin J(1), Mo R(1), Li H(1), Ni Z(2), Sun Q(2), Liu Z(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology for Arid Areas, College of 
Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, Key Laboratory of Crop Heterosis 
and Utilization (MOE), Beijing Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, China 
Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich 
Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.

Polyploidization is a major driving force in plant evolution. 
Allopolyploidization, involving hybridization and genome doubling, can cause 
extensive transcriptome reprogramming which confers allopolyploids higher 
evolutionary potential than their diploid progenitors. To date, little is known 
about the interplay between hybridization and genome doubling in transcriptome 
reprogramming. Here, we performed genome-wide analyses of transcriptome 
reprogramming during allopolyploidization in wheat and brassica lineages. Our 
results indicated that hybridization-induced transcriptional and splicing 
changes of genes can be largely recovered to parental levels by genome doubling 
in allopolyploids. As transcriptome reprogramming is an important contributor to 
heterosis, our finding updates a longstanding theory that heterosis in 
interspecific hybrids can be permanently fixed through genome doubling. Our 
results also indicated that much of the transcriptome reprogramming in 
interspecific hybrids was not caused by the merging of two parental genomes, 
providing novel insights into the mechanisms underlying both heterosis and 
hybrid speciation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab045
PMCID: PMC8136492
PMID: 33585937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


992. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2520-2531. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab046.

Global Patterns of Recombination across Human Viruses.

Patiño-Galindo JÁ(1), Filip I(1), Rabadan R(1).

Author information:
(1)Program for Mathematical Genomics, Departments of Systems Biology and 
Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Viral recombination is a major evolutionary mechanism driving adaptation 
processes, such as the ability of host-switching. Understanding global patterns 
of recombination could help to identify underlying mechanisms and to evaluate 
the potential risks of rapid adaptation. Conventional approaches (e.g., those 
based on linkage disequilibrium) are computationally demanding or even 
intractable when sequence alignments include hundreds of sequences, common in 
viral data sets. We present a comprehensive analysis of recombination across 30 
genomic alignments from viruses infecting humans. In order to scale the analysis 
and avoid the computational limitations of conventional approaches, we apply 
newly developed topological data analysis methods able to infer recombination 
rates for large data sets. We show that viruses, such as ZEBOV and MARV, 
consistently displayed low levels of recombination, whereas high levels of 
recombination were observed in Sarbecoviruses, HBV, HEV, Rhinovirus A, and HIV. 
We observe that recombination is more common in positive single-stranded RNA 
viruses than in negatively single-stranded RNA ones. Interestingly, the 
comparison across multiple viruses suggests an inverse correlation between 
genome length and recombination rate. Positional analyses of recombination 
breakpoints along viral genomes, combined with our approach, detected at least 
39 nonuniform patterns of recombination (i.e., cold or hotspots) in 18 viral 
groups. Among these, noteworthy hotspots are found in MERS-CoV and 
Sarbecoviruses (at spike, Nucleocapsid and ORF8). In summary, we have developed 
a fast pipeline to measure recombination that, combined with other approaches, 
has allowed us to find both common and lineage-specific patterns of 
recombination among viruses with potential relevance in viral adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab046
PMCID: PMC8136497
PMID: 33585889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


993. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2014-2029. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab003.

Coevolutionary and Phylogenetic Analysis of Mimiviral Replication Machinery 
Suggest the Cellular Origin of Mimiviruses.

Patil S(1), Kondabagil K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology 
Bombay, Powai, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Mimivirus is one of the most complex and largest viruses known. The origin and 
evolution of Mimivirus and other giant viruses have been a subject of intense 
study in the last two decades. The two prevailing hypotheses on the origin of 
Mimivirus and other viruses are the reduction hypothesis, which posits that 
viruses emerged from modern unicellular organisms; whereas the virus-first 
hypothesis proposes viruses as relics of precellular forms of life. In this 
study, to gain insights into the origin of Mimivirus, we have carried out 
extensive phylogenetic, correlation, and multidimensional scaling analyses of 
the putative proteins involved in the replication of its 1.2-Mb large genome. 
Correlation analysis and multidimensional scaling methods were validated using 
bacteriophage, bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotic replication proteins before 
applying to Mimivirus. We show that a large fraction of mimiviral replication 
proteins, including polymerase B, clamp, and clamp loaders are of eukaryotic 
origin and are coevolving. Although phylogenetic analysis places some components 
along the lineages of phage and bacteria, we show that all the 
replication-related genes have been homogenized and are under purifying 
selection. Collectively our analysis supports the idea that Mimivirus originated 
from a complex cellular ancestor. We hypothesize that Mimivirus has largely 
retained complex replication machinery reminiscent of its progenitor while 
losing most of the other genes related to processes such as metabolism and 
translation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab003
PMCID: PMC8097291
PMID: 33570580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


994. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2497-2512. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab044.

Causes and Consequences of Bacteriophage Diversification via Genetic Exchanges 
across Lifestyles and Bacterial Taxa.

Moura de Sousa JA(1), Pfeifer E(1), Touchon M(1), Rocha EPC(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Evolutionary Genomics, Institut Pasteur, CNRS, UMR3525, Paris, 
France.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2675.

Bacteriophages (phages) evolve rapidly by acquiring genes from other phages. 
This results in mosaic genomes. Here, we identify numerous genetic transfers 
between distantly related phages and aim at understanding their frequency, 
consequences, and the conditions favoring them. Gene flow tends to occur between 
phages that are enriched for recombinases, transposases, and nonhomologous end 
joining, suggesting that both homologous and illegitimate recombination 
contribute to gene flow. Phage family and host phyla are strong barriers to gene 
exchange, but phage lifestyle is not. Even if we observe four times more recent 
transfers between temperate phages than between other pairs, there is extensive 
gene flow between temperate and virulent phages, and between the latter. These 
predominantly involve virulent phages with large genomes previously classed as 
low gene flux, and lead to the preferential transfer of genes encoding functions 
involved in cell energetics, nucleotide metabolism, DNA packaging and injection, 
and virion assembly. Such exchanges may contribute to the observed twice larger 
genomes of virulent phages. We used genetic transfers, which occur upon 
coinfection of a host, to compare phage host range. We found that virulent 
phages have broader host ranges and can mediate genetic exchanges between narrow 
host range temperate phages infecting distant bacterial hosts, thus contributing 
to gene flow between virulent phages, as well as between temperate phages. This 
gene flow drastically expands the gene repertoires available for phage and 
bacterial evolution, including the transfer of functional innovations across 
taxa.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab044
PMCID: PMC8136500
PMID: 33570565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


995. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):2692-2703. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab042.

Evolution of Conserved Noncoding Sequences in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Yocca AE(1)(2), Lu Z(3), Schmitz RJ(3), Freeling M(4), Edger PP(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
USA.
(2)Department of Horticulture, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA.
(4)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(5)Ecology, Evolutionary Biology and Behavior, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI, USA.

Recent pangenome studies have revealed a large fraction of the gene content 
within a species exhibits presence-absence variation (PAV). However, coding 
regions alone provide an incomplete assessment of functional genomic sequence 
variation at the species level. Little to no attention has been paid to 
noncoding regulatory regions in pangenome studies, though these sequences 
directly modulate gene expression and phenotype. To uncover regulatory genetic 
variation, we generated chromosome-scale genome assemblies for thirty 
Arabidopsis thaliana accessions from multiple distinct habitats and 
characterized species level variation in Conserved Noncoding Sequences (CNS). 
Our analyses uncovered not only PAV and positional variation (PosV) but that 
diversity in CNS is nonrandom, with variants shared across different accessions. 
Using evolutionary analyses and chromatin accessibility data, we provide further 
evidence supporting roles for conserved and variable CNS in gene regulation. 
Additionally, our data suggests that transposable elements contribute to CNS 
variation. Characterizing species-level diversity in all functional genomic 
sequences may later uncover previously unknown mechanistic links between 
genotype and phenotype.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab042
PMCID: PMC8233505
PMID: 33565589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


996. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2446-2467. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab038.

Taxonomic Sampling and Rare Genomic Changes Overcome Long-Branch Attraction in 
the Phylogenetic Placement of Pseudoscorpions.

Ontano AZ(1), Gainett G(1), Aharon S(2), Ballesteros JA(1), Benavides LR(3), 
Corbett KF(1), Gavish-Regev E(2), Harvey MS(4), Monsma S(5), Santibáñez-López 
CE(6), Setton EVW(1), Zehms JT(1), Zeh JA(7), Zeh DW(7), Sharma PP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI, USA.
(2)National Natural History Collections, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Collections & Research, Western Australian Museum, Welshpool, WA, Australia.
(5)Lucigen Corporation, Middleton, WU, USA.
(6)Department of Biology, Eastern Connecticut State University, Willimantic, CT, 
USA.
(7)Department of Biology and Program in Ecology, Evolution & Conservation 
Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, NV, USA.

Long-branch attraction is a systematic artifact that results in erroneous 
groupings of fast-evolving taxa. The combination of short, deep internodes in 
tandem with long-branch attraction artifacts has produced empirically 
intractable parts of the Tree of Life. One such group is the arthropod subphylum 
Chelicerata, whose backbone phylogeny has remained unstable despite improvements 
in phylogenetic methods and genome-scale data sets. Pseudoscorpion placement is 
particularly variable across data sets and analytical frameworks, with this 
group either clustering with other long-branch orders or with Arachnopulmonata 
(scorpions and tetrapulmonates). To surmount long-branch attraction, we 
investigated the effect of taxonomic sampling via sequential deletion of basally 
branching pseudoscorpion superfamilies, as well as varying gene occupancy 
thresholds in supermatrices. We show that concatenated supermatrices and 
coalescent-based summary species tree approaches support a sister group 
relationship of pseudoscorpions and scorpions, when more of the basally 
branching taxa are sampled. Matrix completeness had demonstrably less influence 
on tree topology. As an external arbiter of phylogenetic placement, we leveraged 
the recent discovery of an ancient genome duplication in the common ancestor of 
Arachnopulmonata as a litmus test for competing hypotheses of pseudoscorpion 
relationships. We generated a high-quality developmental transcriptome and the 
first genome for pseudoscorpions to assess the incidence of 
arachnopulmonate-specific duplications (e.g., homeobox genes and miRNAs). Our 
results support the inclusion of pseudoscorpions in Arachnopulmonata (new 
definition), as the sister group of scorpions. Panscorpiones (new name) is 
proposed for the clade uniting Scorpiones and Pseudoscorpiones.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab038
PMCID: PMC8136511
PMID: 33565584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


997. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2639-2659. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab043.

Systematic Detection of Large-Scale Multigene Horizontal Transfer in 
Prokaryotes.

Kloub L(1), Gosselin S(2), Fullmer M(2)(3), Graf J(2)(4), Gogarten JP(2)(4), 
Bansal MS(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
CT, USA.
(3)Bioinformatics Institute, School of Biological Sciences, The University of 
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)The Institute for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 
USA.

Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is central to prokaryotic evolution. However, 
little is known about the "scale" of individual HGT events. In this work, we 
introduce the first computational framework to help answer the following 
fundamental question: How often does more than one gene get horizontally 
transferred in a single HGT event? Our method, called HoMer, uses phylogenetic 
reconciliation to infer single-gene HGT events across a given set of 
species/strains, employs several techniques to account for inference error and 
uncertainty, combines that information with gene order information from extant 
genomes, and uses statistical analysis to identify candidate horizontal 
multigene transfers (HMGTs) in both extant and ancestral species/strains. HoMer 
is highly scalable and can be easily used to infer HMGTs across hundreds of 
genomes. We apply HoMer to a genome-scale data set of over 22,000 gene families 
from 103 Aeromonas genomes and identify a large number of plausible HMGTs of 
various scales at both small and large phylogenetic distances. Analysis of these 
HMGTs reveals interesting relationships between gene function, phylogenetic 
distance, and frequency of multigene transfer. Among other insights, we find 
that 1) the observed relative frequency of HMGT increases as divergence between 
genomes increases, 2) HMGTs often have conserved gene functions, and 3) rare 
genes are frequently acquired through HMGT. We also analyze in detail HMGTs 
involving the zonula occludens toxin and type III secretion systems. By enabling 
the systematic inference of HMGTs on a large scale, HoMer will facilitate a more 
accurate and more complete understanding of HGT and microbial evolution.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab043
PMCID: PMC8136488
PMID: 33565580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


998. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2493-2496. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab041.

Is the Dinoflagellate Amoebophrya Really Missing an mtDNA?

Kayal E(1), Smith DR(2).

Author information:
(1)Fédération de Recherche 2424 Sorbonne Université & Centre National pour la 
Recherche Scientifique, Station Biologique de Roscoff, Roscoff, France.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a universal hallmark of aerobic eukaryotes. That is 
why the recent suggestion by John et al. (2019. An aerobic eukaryotic parasite 
with functional mitochondria that likely lacks a mitochondrial genome. Sci Adv. 
5(4):eaav1110.) that the aerobic dinoflagellate Amoebophrya sp. strain AT5 
(Syndiniales) lacks mtDNA was so remarkable. Here, by reanalyzing recently 
published genomic and transcriptomic data from three Amoebophrya strains, we 
provide evidence of a cryptic, highly reduced mtDNA in this clade. More work is 
needed before one can definitively say if Amoebophrya has or does not have an 
mtDNA, but for now, the data are pointing toward the existence of one. 
Ultimately, we urge caution when basing supposedly absent genomic features on 
single line evidences.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab041
PMCID: PMC8136515
PMID: 33565578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


999. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2070-2075. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab007.

Diverse Eukaryotic CGG-Binding Proteins Produced by Independent Domestications 
of hAT Transposons.

Yellan I(1), Yang AWH(2), Hughes TR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The human transcription factor (TF) CGGBP1 (CGG-binding protein) is conserved 
only in amniotes and is believed to derive from the zf-BED and Hermes 
transposase DNA-binding domains (DBDs) of a hAT DNA transposon. Here, we show 
that sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins with this bipartite domain structure 
have resulted from dozens of independent hAT domestications in different 
eukaryotic lineages. CGGBPs display a wide range of sequence specificity, 
usually including preferences for CGG or CGC trinucleotides, whereas some bind 
AT-rich motifs. The CGGBPs are almost entirely nonsyntenic, and their protein 
sequences, DNA-binding motifs, and patterns of presence or absence in genomes 
are uncharacteristic of ancestry via speciation. At least eight CGGBPs in the 
coelacanth Latimeria chalumnae bind distinct motifs, and the expression of the 
corresponding genes varies considerably across tissues, suggesting 
tissue-restricted function.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab007
PMCID: PMC8097297
PMID: 33561217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1000. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2030-2044. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab004.

Functional Diversification, Redundancy, and Epistasis among Paralogs of the 
Drosophila melanogaster Obp50a-d Gene Cluster.

Johnstun JA(1), Shankar V(2), Mokashi SS(1)(2), Sunkara LT(2), Ihearahu 
UE(2)(3), Lyman RL(2), Mackay TFC(1)(2), Anholt RRH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Program in Genetics and W.M. Keck Center 
for Behavioral Biology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics and Biochemistry and Center for Human Genetics, 
Clemson University, Greenwood, SC, USA.
(3)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, 
United Kingdom.

Large multigene families, such as the insect odorant-binding proteins (OBPs), 
are thought to arise through functional diversification after repeated gene 
duplications. Whereas many OBPs function in chemoreception, members of this 
family are also expressed in tissues outside chemosensory organs. Paralogs of 
the Obp50 gene cluster are expressed in metabolic and male reproductive tissues, 
but their functions and interrelationships remain unknown. Here, we report the 
genetic dissection of four members of the Obp50 cluster, which are in close 
physical proximity without intervening genes. We used CRISPR technology to 
excise the entire cluster while introducing a PhiC31 reintegration site to 
reinsert constructs in which different combinations of the constituent Obp genes 
were either intact or rendered inactive. We performed whole transcriptome 
sequencing and assessed sexually dimorphic changes in transcript abundances 
(transcriptional niches) associated with each gene-edited genotype. Using this 
approach, we were able to estimate redundancy, additivity, diversification, and 
epistasis among Obp50 paralogs. We analyzed the effects of gene editing of this 
cluster on organismal phenotypes and found a significant skewing of sex ratios 
attributable to Obp50a, and sex-specific effects on starvation stress resistance 
attributable to Obp50d. Thus, there is functional diversification within the 
Obp50 cluster with Obp50a contributing to development and Obp50d to stress 
resistance. The deletion-reinsertion approach we applied to the Obp50 cluster 
provides a general paradigm for the genetic dissection of paralogs of multigene 
families.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab004
PMCID: PMC8097280
PMID: 33560417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1001. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2468-2474. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab039.

Gv1, a Zinc Finger Gene Controlling Endogenous MLV Expression.

Young GR(1), Ferron AKW(1), Panova V(2), Eksmond U(2), Oliver PL(3), Kassiotis 
G(2)(4), Stoye JP(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Retrovirus-host Interactions Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, 
UK.
(2)Retroviral Immunology, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.
(3)MRC Harwell Institute, Harwell Campus, Oxfordshire, UK.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease, Imperial College London, London, UK.

The genomes of inbred mice harbor around 50 endogenous murine leukemia virus 
(MLV) loci, although the specific complement varies greatly between strains. The 
Gv1 locus is known to control the transcription of endogenous MLVs and to be the 
dominant determinant of cell-surface presentation of MLV envelope, the GIX 
antigen. Here, we identify a single Krüppel-associated box zinc finger protein 
(ZFP) gene, Zfp998, as Gv1 and show it to be necessary and sufficient to 
determine the GIX+ phenotype. By long-read sequencing of bacterial artificial 
chromosome clones from 129 mice, the prototypic GIX+ strain, we reveal the 
source of sufficiency and deficiency as splice-acceptor variations and highlight 
the varying origins of the chromosomal region encompassing Gv1. Zfp998 becomes 
the second identified ZFP gene responsible for epigenetic suppression of 
endogenous MLVs in mice and further highlights the prominent role of this gene 
family in control of endogenous retroviruses.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab039
PMCID: PMC8136514
PMID: 33560369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1002. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2428-2445. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab036.

The Heterogeneous Landscape and Early Evolution of Pathogen-Associated CpG 
Dinucleotides in SARS-CoV-2.

Di Gioacchino A(1), Šulc P(2), Komarova AV(3), Greenbaum BD(4), Monasson R(1), 
Cocco S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Physique de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL & CNRS UMR8063, 
Sorbonne Université, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(2)School of Molecular Sciences and Center for Molecular Design and Biomimetics, 
The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(3)Molecular Genetics of RNA Viruses, Department of Virology, Institut Pasteur, 
CNRS UMR-3569, Paris, France.
(4)Computational Oncology, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2020 May 07;:
    SSRN. 2020 May 27;:3611280.

COVID-19 can lead to acute respiratory syndrome, which can be due to 
dysregulated immune signaling. We analyze the distribution of CpG dinucleotides, 
a pathogen-associated molecular pattern, in the SARS-CoV-2 genome. We 
characterize CpG content by a CpG force that accounts for statistical 
constraints acting on the genome at the nucleotidic and amino acid levels. The 
CpG force, as the CpG content, is overall low compared with other pathogenic 
betacoronaviruses; however, it widely fluctuates along the genome, with a 
particularly low value, comparable with the circulating seasonal HKU1, in the 
spike coding region and a greater value, comparable with SARS and MERS, in the 
highly expressed nucleocapside coding region (N ORF), whose transcripts are 
relatively abundant in the cytoplasm of infected cells and present in the 3'UTRs 
of all subgenomic RNA. This dual nature of CpG content could confer to 
SARS-CoV-2 the ability to avoid triggering pattern recognition receptors upon 
entry, while eliciting a stronger response during replication. We then 
investigate the evolution of synonymous mutations since the outbreak of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, finding a signature of CpG loss in regions with a greater CpG 
force. Sequence motifs preceding the CpG-loss-associated loci in the N ORF match 
recently identified binding patterns of the zinc finger antiviral protein. Using 
a model of the viral gene evolution under human host pressure, we find that 
synonymous mutations seem driven in the SARS-CoV-2 genome, and particularly in 
the N ORF, by the viral codon bias, the transition-transversion bias, and the 
pressure to lower CpG content.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab036
PMCID: PMC7928797
PMID: 33555346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1003. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2475-2492. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab040.

Size Variation of the Nonrecombining Region on the Mating-Type Chromosomes in 
the Fungal Podospora anserina Species Complex.

Hartmann FE(1), Ament-Velásquez SL(2), Vogan AA(2), Gautier V(3), Le Prieur 
S(1), Berramdane M(1), Snirc A(1), Johannesson H(2), Grognet P(4), Malagnac 
F(4), Silar P(3), Giraud T(1).

Author information:
(1)Ecologie Systématique Evolution, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, 
AgroParisTech, Orsay, France.
(2)Organismal Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Energies de Demain, Université de Paris, 
Paris, France.
(4)CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), Université 
Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Sex chromosomes often carry large nonrecombining regions that can extend 
progressively over time, generating evolutionary strata of sequence divergence. 
However, some sex chromosomes display an incomplete suppression of 
recombination. Large genomic regions without recombination and evolutionary 
strata have also been documented around fungal mating-type loci, but have been 
studied in only a few fungal systems. In the model fungus Podospora anserina 
(Ascomycota, Sordariomycetes), the reference S strain lacks recombination across 
a 0.8-Mb region around the mating-type locus. The lack of recombination in this 
region ensures that nuclei of opposite mating types are packaged into a single 
ascospore (pseudohomothallic lifecycle). We found evidence for a lack of 
recombination around the mating-type locus in the genomes of ten P. anserina 
strains and six closely related pseudohomothallic Podospora species. 
Importantly, the size of the nonrecombining region differed between strains and 
species, as indicated by the heterozygosity levels around the mating-type locus 
and experimental selfing. The nonrecombining region is probably labile and 
polymorphic, differing in size and precise location within and between species, 
resulting in occasional, but infrequent, recombination at a given base pair. 
This view is also supported by the low divergence between mating types, and the 
lack of strong linkage disequilibrium, chromosomal rearrangements, transspecific 
polymorphism and genomic degeneration. We found a pattern suggestive of 
evolutionary strata in P. pseudocomata. The observed heterozygosity levels 
indicate low but nonnull outcrossing rates in nature in these pseudohomothallic 
fungi. This study adds to our understanding of mating-type chromosome evolution 
and its relationship to mating systems.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab040
PMCID: PMC8136517
PMID: 33555341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1004. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2660-2672. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab037.

Reconstruction of Microbial Haplotypes by Integration of Statistical and 
Physical Linkage in Scaffolding.

Cao C(1), He J(1)(2), Mak L(1), Perera D(1), Kwok D(3), Wang J(4), Li M(1), 
Mourier T(5), Gavriliuc S(1), Greenberg M(3), Morrissy AS(1), Sycuro LK(1)(6), 
Yang G(1)(7), Jeffares DC(8), Long Q(1)(3)(7)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Alberta Children's Hospital 
Research Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.
(3)Department of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, 
Canada.
(4)Electrical and Computer Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Pathogen Genomics Laboratory, Biological and Environmental Sciences and 
Engineering (BESE) Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology 
(KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Infectious Diseases, Snyder 
Institute for Chronic Diseases, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(8)Department of Biology, York Biomedical Research Institute, University of 
York, York, United Kingdom.
(9)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, O'Brien Institute for Public Health, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.

DNA sequencing technologies provide unprecedented opportunities to analyze 
within-host evolution of microorganism populations. Often, within-host 
populations are analyzed via pooled sequencing of the population, which contains 
multiple individuals or "haplotypes." However, current next-generation 
sequencing instruments, in conjunction with single-molecule barcoded 
linked-reads, cannot distinguish long haplotypes directly. Computational 
reconstruction of haplotypes from pooled sequencing has been attempted in 
virology, bacterial genomics, metagenomics, and human genetics, using algorithms 
based on either cross-host genetic sharing or within-host genomic reads. Here, 
we describe PoolHapX, a flexible computational approach that integrates 
information from both genetic sharing and genomic sequencing. We demonstrated 
that PoolHapX outperforms state-of-the-art tools tailored to specific organismal 
systems, and is robust to within-host evolution. Importantly, together with 
barcoded linked-reads, PoolHapX can infer whole-chromosome-scale haplotypes from 
50 pools each containing 12 different haplotypes. By analyzing real data, we 
uncovered dynamic variations in the evolutionary processes of within-patient HIV 
populations previously unobserved in single position-based analysis.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab037
PMCID: PMC8136496
PMID: 33547786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1005. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1691-1693. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab016.

Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution, Council and Business Meetings, 
2020.

Singh N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of 
Oregon.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab016
PMCID: PMC8042769
PMID: 33537761


1006. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2413-2427. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab035.

The Genomes of Two Billfishes Provide Insights into the Evolution of Endothermy 
in Teleosts.

Wu B(1)(2), Feng C(3)(4), Zhu C(3), Xu W(3), Yuan Y(3), Hu M(3), Yuan K(3), Li 
Y(3), Ren Y(3), Zhou Y(1)(2), Jiang H(4)(2), Qiu Q(3), Wang W(3), He S(1)(3)(2), 
Wang K(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Deep-Sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Sanya, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)School for Ecological and Environmental Sciences, Northwestern Polytechnical 
University, Xi'an, China.
(4)The Key Laboratory of Aquatic Biodiversity and Conservation of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Wuhan, China.

Endothermy is a typical convergent phenomenon which has evolved independently at 
least eight times in vertebrates, and is of significant advantage to organisms 
in extending their niches. However, how vertebrates other than mammals or birds, 
especially teleosts, achieve endothermy has not previously been fully 
understood. In this study, we sequenced the genomes of two billfishes (swordfish 
and sailfish), members of a representative lineage of endothermic teleosts. 
Convergent amino acid replacements were observed in proteins related to heat 
production and the visual system in two endothermic teleost lineages, billfishes 
and tunas. The billfish-specific genetic innovations were found to be associated 
with heat exchange, thermoregulation, and the specialized morphology, including 
elongated bill, enlarged dorsal fin in sailfish and loss of the pelvic fin in 
swordfish.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab035
PMCID: PMC8136490
PMID: 33533895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1007. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2396-2412. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab034.

A Comprehensive Evolutionary Scenario of Cell Division and Associated Processes 
in the Firmicutes.

Garcia PS(1)(2)(3), Duchemin W(1), Flandrois JP(1), Gribaldo S(3), Grangeasse 
C(2), Brochier-Armanet C(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS, UMR5558, Laboratoire de 
Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive, 43 bd du 11 novembre 1918 Villeurbanne F-69622, 
France.
(2)Molecular Microbiology and Structural Biochemistry, UMR 5086, Université 
Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, Lyon, France.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Unit "Evolutionary Biology of the Microbial 
Cell", Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The cell cycle is a fundamental process that has been extensively studied in 
bacteria. However, many of its components and their interactions with 
machineries involved in other cellular processes are poorly understood. 
Furthermore, most knowledge relies on the study of a few models, but the real 
diversity of the cell division apparatus and its evolution are largely unknown. 
Here, we present a massive in-silico analysis of cell division and associated 
processes in around 1,000 genomes of the Firmicutes, a major bacterial phylum 
encompassing models (i.e. Bacillus subtilis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and 
Staphylococcus aureus), as well as many important pathogens. We analyzed over 
160 proteins by using an original approach combining phylogenetic 
reconciliation, phylogenetic profiles, and gene cluster survey. Our results 
reveal the presence of substantial differences among clades and pinpoints a 
number of evolutionary hotspots. In particular, the emergence of Bacilli 
coincides with an expansion of the gene repertoires involved in cell wall 
synthesis and remodeling. We also highlight major genomic rearrangements at the 
emergence of Streptococcaceae. We establish a functional network in Firmicutes 
that allows identifying new functional links inside one same process such as 
between FtsW (peptidoglycan polymerase) and a previously undescribed 
Penicilin-Binding Protein or between different processes, such as replication 
and cell wall synthesis. Finally, we identify new candidates involved in 
sporulation and cell wall synthesis. Our results provide a previously 
undescribed view on the diversity of the bacterial cell cycle, testable 
hypotheses for further experimental studies, and a methodological framework for 
the analysis of any other biological system.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab034
PMCID: PMC8136486
PMID: 33533884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1008. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2351-2365. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab030.

Genomic Insights into the Origin and Evolution of Molluscan Red-Bloodedness in 
the Blood Clam Tegillarca granosa.

Bao Y(1), Zeng Q(2), Wang J(2), Zhang Z(1)(3), Zhang Y(4), Wang S(1), Wong 
NK(4)(5), Yuan W(1)(3), Huang Y(1)(3), Zhang W(1)(3), Liu J(2), Lv L(1), Xue 
Q(1), Zha S(1), Peng Z(1), Yao H(1), Bao Z(2), Wang S(2), Lin Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Aquatic Germplasm Resource of Zhejiang, College of 
Biological & Environmental Sciences, Zhejiang Wanli University, Ningbo 315100, 
China.
(2)Sars-Fang Centre & MOE Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding, Ocean 
University of China and National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology 
(LMBB & LMFSFPP), Qingdao 266000, China.
(3)School of Marine Sciences, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315010, China.
(4)CAS Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology and Guangdong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute 
of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510301, China.
(5)The Eighth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen 518000, 
China.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 28;:

Blood clams differ from their molluscan kins by exhibiting a unique red-blood 
(RB) phenotype; however, the genetic basis and biochemical machinery subserving 
this evolutionary innovation remain unclear. As a fundamental step toward 
resolving this mystery, we presented the first chromosome-level genome and 
comprehensive transcriptomes of the blood clam Tegillarca granosa for an 
integrated genomic, evolutionary, and functional analyses of clam RB phenotype. 
We identified blood clam-specific and expanded gene families, as well as gene 
pathways that are of RB relevant. Clam-specific RB-related hemoglobins (Hbs) 
showed close phylogenetic relationships with myoglobins (Mbs) of blood clam and 
other molluscs without the RB phenotype, indicating that clam-specific Hbs were 
likely evolutionarily derived from the Mb lineage. Strikingly, similar to 
vertebrate Hbs, blood clam Hbs were present in a form of gene cluster. Despite 
the convergent evolution of Hb clusters in blood clam and vertebrates, their Hb 
clusters may have originated from a single ancestral Mb-like gene as evidenced 
by gene phylogeny and synteny analysis. A full suite of enzyme-encoding genes 
for heme synthesis was identified in blood clam, with prominent expression in 
hemolymph and resembling those in vertebrates, suggesting a convergence of both 
RB-related Hb and heme functions in vertebrates and blood clam. RNA interference 
experiments confirmed the functional roles of Hbs and key enzyme of heme 
synthesis in the maintenance of clam RB phenotype. The high-quality genome 
assembly and comprehensive transcriptomes presented herein serve new genomic 
resources for the super-diverse phylum Mollusca, and provide deep insights into 
the origin and evolution of invertebrate RB.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab030
PMCID: PMC8136487
PMID: 33528571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1009. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2240-2259. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab020.

The Mastigamoeba balamuthi Genome and the Nature of the Free-Living Ancestor of 
Entamoeba.

Žárský V(1), Klimeš V(2), Pačes J(3), Vlček Č(3), Hradilová M(3), Beneš V(4), 
Nývltová E(1), Hrdý I(1), Pyrih J(1), Mach J(1), Barlow L(5), Stairs CW(6)(7), 
Eme L(8), Hall N(9)(10), Eliáš M(2), Dacks JB(5)(11)(12), Roger A(6), Tachezy 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, 
Vestec, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
(4)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Genomics Core Facility, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, 
Canada.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, NS, Canada.
(7)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(8)Diversity, Ecology and Evolution of Microbes (DEEM), Unité Ecologie 
Systématique Evolution Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France.
(9)The Earlham Institute, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(10)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(11)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(12)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre, CAS, v.v.i., Ceske Budejovice, 
Czech Republic.

The transition of free-living organisms to parasitic organisms is a mysterious 
process that occurs in all major eukaryotic lineages. Parasites display 
seemingly unique features associated with their pathogenicity; however, it is 
important to distinguish ancestral preconditions to parasitism from truly new 
parasite-specific functions. Here, we sequenced the genome and transcriptome of 
anaerobic free-living Mastigamoeba balamuthi and performed phylogenomic analysis 
of four related members of the Archamoebae, including Entamoeba histolytica, an 
important intestinal pathogen of humans. We aimed to trace gene histories 
throughout the adaptation of the aerobic ancestor of Archamoebae to anaerobiosis 
and throughout the transition from a free-living to a parasitic lifestyle. These 
events were associated with massive gene losses that, in parasitic lineages, 
resulted in a reduction in structural features, complete losses of some 
metabolic pathways, and a reduction in metabolic complexity. By reconstructing 
the features of the common ancestor of Archamoebae, we estimated preconditions 
for the evolution of parasitism in this lineage. The ancestor could apparently 
form chitinous cysts, possessed proteolytic enzyme machinery, compartmentalized 
the sulfate activation pathway in mitochondrion-related organelles, and 
possessed the components for anaerobic energy metabolism. After the split of 
Entamoebidae, this lineage gained genes encoding surface membrane proteins that 
are involved in host-parasite interactions. In contrast, gene gains identified 
in the M. balamuthi lineage were predominantly associated with polysaccharide 
catabolic processes. A phylogenetic analysis of acquired genes suggested an 
essential role of lateral gene transfer in parasite evolution (Entamoeba) and in 
adaptation to anaerobic aquatic sediments (Mastigamoeba).

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab020
PMCID: PMC8136499
PMID: 33528570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1010. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2273-2284. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab022.

Diversification of CD1 Molecules Shapes Lipid Antigen Selectivity.

Paterson NM(1)(2), Al-Zubieri H(1)(2), Barber MF(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, 
USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 
97403, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Molecular studies of host-pathogen evolution have largely focused on the 
consequences of variation at protein-protein interaction surfaces. The potential 
for other microbe-associated macromolecules to promote arms race dynamics with 
host factors remains unclear. The cluster of differentiation 1 (CD1) family of 
vertebrate cell surface receptors plays a crucial role in adaptive immunity 
through binding and presentation of lipid antigens to T-cells. Although CD1 
proteins present a variety of endogenous and microbial lipids to various T-cell 
types, they are less diverse within vertebrate populations than the related 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. We discovered that CD1 genes 
exhibit a high level of divergence between simian primate species, altering 
predicted lipid-binding properties and T-cell receptor interactions. These 
findings suggest that lipid-protein conflicts have shaped CD1 genetic variation 
during primate evolution. Consistent with this hypothesis, multiple primate CD1 
family proteins exhibit signatures of repeated positive selection at surfaces 
impacting antigen presentation, binding pocket morphology, and T-cell receptor 
accessibility. Using a molecular modeling approach, we observe that interspecies 
variation as well as single mutations at rapidly-evolving sites in CD1a 
drastically alter predicted lipid binding and structural features of the T-cell 
recognition surface. We further show that alterations in both endogenous and 
microbial lipid-binding affinities influence the ability of CD1a to undergo 
antigen swapping required for T-cell activation. Together these findings 
establish lipid-protein interactions as a critical force of host-pathogen 
conflict and inform potential strategies for lipid-based vaccine development.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab022
PMCID: PMC8136489
PMID: 33528563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1011. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3486-3493. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab031.

Relax, Keep Walking - A Practical Guide to Continuous Phylogeographic Inference 
with BEAST.

Dellicour S(1)(2), Gill MS(2), Faria NR(3)(4)(5), Rambaut A(6), Pybus OG(4), 
Suchard MA(7)(8)(9), Lemey P(2).

Author information:
(1)Spatial Epidemiology Lab (SpELL), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, 
Belgium.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, J-IDEA, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Instituto de Medicina Tropical, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(6)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Department of Biomathematics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Biostatistics, Fielding School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Spatially explicit phylogeographic analyses can be performed with an inference 
framework that employs relaxed random walks to reconstruct phylogenetic 
dispersal histories in continuous space. This core model was first implemented 
10 years ago and has opened up new opportunities in the field of phylodynamics, 
allowing researchers to map and analyze the spatial dissemination of rapidly 
evolving pathogens. We here provide a detailed and step-by-step guide on how to 
set up, run, and interpret continuous phylogeographic analyses using the 
programs BEAUti, BEAST, Tracer, and TreeAnnotator.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab031
PMCID: PMC8321535
PMID: 33528560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1012. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2227-2239. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab019.

Were Ancestral Proteins Less Specific?

Wheeler LC(1)(2)(3), Harms MJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, 
USA.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, CO, USA.

Some have hypothesized that ancestral proteins were, on average, less specific 
than their descendants. If true, this would provide a universal axis along which 
to organize protein evolution and suggests that reconstructed ancestral proteins 
may be uniquely powerful tools for protein engineering. Ancestral sequence 
reconstruction studies are one line of evidence used to support this hypothesis. 
Previously, we performed such a study, investigating the evolution of 
peptide-binding specificity for the paralogs S100A5 and S100A6. The modern 
proteins appeared more specific than their last common ancestor (ancA5/A6), as 
each paralog bound a subset of the peptides bound by ancA5/A6. In this study, we 
revisit this transition, using quantitative phage display to measure the 
interactions of 30,533 random peptides with human S100A5, S100A6, and ancA5/A6. 
This unbiased screen reveals a different picture. While S100A5 and S100A6 do 
indeed bind to a subset of the peptides recognized by ancA5/A6, they also 
acquired new peptide partners outside of the set recognized by ancA5/A6. Our 
previous work showed that ancA5/A6 had lower specificity than its descendants 
when measured against biological targets; our new work shows that ancA5/A6 has 
similar specificity to the modern proteins when measured against a random set of 
peptide targets. This demonstrates that altered biological specificity does not 
necessarily indicate altered intrinsic specificity, and sounds a cautionary note 
for using ancestral reconstruction studies with biological targets as a means to 
infer global evolutionary trends in specificity.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab019
PMCID: PMC8136485
PMID: 33528559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1013. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2319-2336. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab027.

The Evolution of euAPETALA2 Genes in Vascular Plants: From Plesiomorphic Roles 
in Sporangia to Acquired Functions in Ovules and Fruits.

Zumajo-Cardona C(1)(2), Pabón-Mora N(3), Ambrose BA(1).

Author information:
(1)New York Botanical Garden, Bronx, NY 10458, United States.
(2)The Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York, NY 10016, United 
States.
(3)Instituto de Biología, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín 050010, Colombia.

The field of evolutionary developmental biology can help address how 
morphological novelties evolve, a key question in evolutionary biology. In 
Arabidopsis thaliana, APETALA2 (AP2) plays a role in the development of key 
plant innovations including seeds, flowers, and fruits. AP2 belongs to the 
AP2/ETHYLENE RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING FACTOR family which has members in all 
viridiplantae, making it one of the oldest and most diverse gene lineages. One 
key subclade, present across vascular plants is the euAPETALA2 (euAP2) clade, 
whose founding member is AP2. We reconstructed the evolution of the euAP2 gene 
lineage in vascular plants to better understand its impact on the morphological 
evolution of plants, identifying seven major duplication events. We also 
performed spatiotemporal expression analyses of euAP2/TOE3 genes focusing on 
less explored vascular plant lineages, including ferns, gymnosperms, early 
diverging angiosperms and early diverging eudicots. Altogether, our data suggest 
that euAP2 genes originally contributed to spore and sporangium development, and 
were subsequently recruited to ovule, fruit and floral organ development. 
Finally, euAP2 protein sequences are highly conserved; therefore, changes in the 
role of euAP2 homologs during development are most likely due to changes in 
regulatory regions.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab027
PMCID: PMC8136505
PMID: 33528546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1014. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2260-2272. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab021.

Analysis of Polycerate Mutants Reveals the Evolutionary Co-option of HOXD1 for 
Horn Patterning in Bovidae.

Allais-Bonnet A(1)(2)(3), Hintermann A(4), Deloche MC(1)(2)(3), Cornette R(5), 
Bardou P(6)(7), Naval-Sanchez M(8), Pinton A(6), Haruda A(9), Grohs C(10), 
Zakany J(4), Bigi D(11), Medugorac I(12), Putelat O(13)(14), Greyvenstein O(15), 
Hadfield T(16), Jemaa SB(17), Bunevski G(18), Menzi F(19), Hirter N(19), Paris 
JM(19), Hedges J(20), Palhiere I(6), Rupp R(6), Lenstra JA(21), Gidney L(22), 
Lesur J(23), Schafberg R(9), Stache M(9), Wandhammer MD(24), Arbogast RM(25), 
Guintard C(26)(27), Blin A(28), Boukadiri A(10), Rivière J(10)(29), Esquerré 
D(30), Donnadieu C(30), Danchin-Burge C(31), Reich CM(32), Riley DG(15), 
Marle-Koster EV(33), Cockett N(16), Hayes BJ(34), Drögemüller C(19), Kijas J(8), 
Pailhoux E(2)(3), Tosser-Klopp G(6), Duboule D(4)(35)(36), Capitan A(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)ALLICE, Paris, France.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, INRAE, BREED, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(3)Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, BREED, Maisons-Alfort, France.
(4)Department of Genetics and Evolution, University of Geneva, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(5)Institut de Systématique, Evolution, Biodiversité (ISYEB), Muséum National 
d'Histoire Naturelle, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, EPHE, Université des Antilles, 
Paris, France.
(6)GenPhySE, Université de Toulouse, INRAE, ENVT, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(7)INRAE, Sigenae, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(8)CSIRO Agriculture & Food, St. Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(9)Central Natural Science Collections, Martin Luther University 
Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany.
(10)Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, GABI, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(11)Dipartimento di Scienza e Tecnologie Agro-Alimentari, Alma Mater Studiorum 
University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(12)Population Genomics Group, Department of Veterinary Sciences, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(13)Archéologie Alsace, Sélestat, France.
(14)UMR 7044, ARCHIMEDE, MISHA, Strasbourg, France.
(15)Department of Animal Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 
USA.
(16)Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University, 
Logan, UT, USA.
(17)Laboratoire des Productions Animales et Fourragères, Institut National de la 
Recherche Agronomique de Tunisie, Université de Carthage, Ariana, Tunisia.
(18)Livestock Department, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Food Institute of 
Animal Biotechnology, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, North 
Macedonia.
(19)Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(20)Manx Loaghtan Sheep Breeders' Group, Bassingbourn, Cambridgeshire, United 
Kingdom.
(21)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(22)Rent a Peasant, Tow Law, Bishop Auckland, Durham County, United Kingdom.
(23)Unité Archéozoologie, Archéobotanique, Sociétés Pratiques et Environnements 
(AASPE), CNRS, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.
(24)Musée Zoologique de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(25)CNRS UMR 7044, ARCHIMEDE, MISHA, Strasbourg, France.
(26)Unité d'Anatomie Comparée, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire de l'Agroalimentaire 
et de l'Alimentation, Nantes Atlantique-ONIRIS, Nantes, France.
(27)Groupe d'Études Remodelage Osseux et bioMatériaux (GEROM), Université 
d'Angers, Unité INSERM 922, LHEA/IRIS-IBS, CHU d'Angers, Angers, France.
(28)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, CNRS, UMS 2700 2AD, Paris, France.
(29)INRAE, Micalis Institute, AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 
Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(30)INRAE, US, 1426, GeT-PlaGe, Genotoul, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(31)Institut de l'Elevage, Paris, France.
(32)Agriculture Victoria, AgriBio, Centre for AgriBioscience, Bundoora, VIC, 
Australia.
(33)Department of Science, University of Pretoria, Hatfield, South Africa.
(34)Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation (QAAFI), Centre for 
Animal Science, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(35)Swiss Cancer Research Institute, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(36)Collège de France, Paris, France.

In the course of evolution, pecorans (i.e., higher ruminants) developed a 
remarkable diversity of osseous cranial appendages, collectively referred to as 
"headgear," which likely share the same origin and genetic basis. However, the 
nature and function of the genetic determinants underlying their number and 
position remain elusive. Jacob and other rare populations of sheep and goats are 
characterized by polyceraty, the presence of more than two horns. Here, we 
characterize distinct POLYCERATE alleles in each species, both associated with 
defective HOXD1 function. We show that haploinsufficiency at this locus results 
in the splitting of horn bud primordia, likely following the abnormal extension 
of an initial morphogenetic field. These results highlight the key role played 
by this gene in headgear patterning and illustrate the evolutionary co-option of 
a gene involved in the early development of bilateria to properly fix the 
position and number of these distinctive organs of Bovidae.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab021
PMCID: PMC8136503
PMID: 33528505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1015. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2306-2318. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab026.

Genome-Scale Profiling Reveals Noncoding Loci Carry Higher Proportions of 
Concordant Data.

Literman R(1)(2), Schwartz R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Rhode Island, South 
Kingstown, RI, USA.
(2)Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Office of Regulatory Science, 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, College Park, MD, USA.

Many evolutionary relationships remain controversial despite whole-genome 
sequencing data. These controversies arise, in part, due to challenges 
associated with accurately modeling the complex phylogenetic signal coming from 
genomic regions experiencing distinct evolutionary forces. Here, we examine how 
different regions of the genome support or contradict well-established 
relationships among three mammal groups using millions of orthologous 
parsimony-informative biallelic sites (PIBS) distributed across primate, rodent, 
and Pecora genomes. We compared PIBS concordance percentages among locus types 
(e.g. coding sequences (CDS), introns, intergenic regions), and contrasted PIBS 
utility over evolutionary timescales. Sites derived from noncoding sequences 
provided more data and proportionally more concordant sites compared with those 
from CDS in all clades. CDS PIBS were also predominant drivers of tree 
incongruence in two cases of topological conflict. PIBS derived from most locus 
types provided surprisingly consistent support for splitting events spread 
across the timescales we examined, although we find evidence that CDS and 
intronic PIBS may, respectively and to a limited degree, inform 
disproportionately about older and younger splits. In this era of accessible 
wholegenome sequence data, these results:1) suggest benefits to more 
intentionally focusing on noncoding loci as robust data for tree inference and 
2) reinforce the importance of accurate modeling, especially when using CDS 
data.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab026
PMCID: PMC8136493
PMID: 33528497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1016. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1847-1859. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa329.

Predicting the Evolution of Sexual Dimorphism in Gene Expression.

Houle D(1), Cheng C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, 
USA.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA.

Sexual dimorphism in gene expression is likely to be the underlying source of 
dimorphism in a variety of traits. Many analyses implicitly make the assumption 
that dimorphism only evolves when selection favors different phenotypes in the 
two sexes, although theory makes clear that it can also evolve as an indirect 
response to other kinds of selection. Furthermore, previous analyses consider 
the evolution of a single transcript or trait at a time, ignoring the genetic 
covariance with other transcripts and traits. We first show which aspects of the 
genetic-variance-covariance matrix, G, affect dimorphism when these assumptions 
about selection are relaxed. We then reanalyze gene expression data from 
Drosophila melanogaster with these predictions in mind. Dimorphism of gene 
expression for individual transcripts shows the signature of both direct 
selection for dimorphism and indirect responses to selection. To account for the 
effect of measurement error on evolutionary predictions, we estimated a G matrix 
for eight linear combinations of expression traits. Sex-specific genetic 
variances in female- and male-biased transcription, as well as one relatively 
unbiased combination, were quite unequal, ensuring that most forms of selection 
on these traits will have large effects on dimorphism. Predictions of response 
to selection based on the whole G matrix showed that sexually concordant and 
antagonistic selection are equally capable of changing sexual dimorphism. In 
addition, the indirect responses of dimorphism due to cross-trait covariances 
were quite substantial. The assumption that sexual dimorphism in transcription 
is an adaptation could be incorrect in many specific cases.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa329
PMCID: PMC8097294
PMID: 33512493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1017. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2285-2305. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab024.

Unraveling the Complex Hybrid Ancestry and Domestication History of Cultivated 
Strawberry.

Hardigan MA(1), Lorant A(1), Pincot DDA(1), Feldmann MJ(1), Famula RA(1), 
Acharya CB(1), Lee S(2), Verma S(2), Whitaker VM(2), Bassil N(3), Zurn J(3), 
Cole GS(1), Bird K(4), Edger PP(4), Knapp SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 
95616, USA.
(2)IFAS Gulf Coast Research and Education Center, Department of Horticulture, 
University of Florida, Wimauma, FL 33598, USA.
(3)USDA-ARS, National Clonal Germplasm Repository, Corvallis, OR 92182, USA.
(4)Department of Horticultural Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
MI 48824, USA.

Cultivated strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa) is one of our youngest domesticates, 
originating in early eighteenth-century Europe from spontaneous hybrids between 
wild allo-octoploid species (Fragaria chiloensis and Fragaria virginiana). The 
improvement of horticultural traits by 300 years of breeding has enabled the 
global expansion of strawberry production. Here, we describe the genomic history 
of strawberry domestication from the earliest hybrids to modern cultivars. We 
observed a significant increase in heterozygosity among interspecific hybrids 
and a decrease in heterozygosity among domesticated descendants of those 
hybrids. Selective sweeps were found across the genome in early and modern 
phases of domestication-59-76% of the selectively swept genes originated in the 
three less dominant ancestral subgenomes. Contrary to the tenet that genetic 
diversity is limited in cultivated strawberry, we found that the octoploid 
species harbor massive allelic diversity and that F. × ananassa harbors as much 
allelic diversity as either wild founder. We identified 41.8 M 
subgenome-specific DNA variants among resequenced wild and domesticated 
individuals. Strikingly, 98% of common alleles and 73% of total alleles were 
shared between wild and domesticated populations. Moreover, genome-wide 
estimates of nucleotide diversity were virtually identical in F. chiloensis,F. 
virginiana, and F. × ananassa (π = 0.0059-0.0060). We found, however, that 
nucleotide diversity and heterozygosity were significantly lower in modern F. × 
ananassa populations that have experienced significant genetic gains and have 
produced numerous agriculturally important cultivars.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab024
PMCID: PMC8136507
PMID: 33507311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1018. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2209-2226. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab018.

Pneumococcal Colonization and Virulence Factors Identified Via Experimental 
Evolution in Infection Models.

Green AE(1), Howarth D(1), Chaguza C(2), Echlin H(3), Langendonk RF(1), Munro 
C(1), Barton TE(1), Hinton JCD(1), Bentley SD(2), Rosch JW(3), Neill DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Infection, Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of 
Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Parasites and Microbes Programme, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome 
Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is a commensal of the human nasopharynx and a major 
cause of respiratory and invasive disease. We examined adaptation and evolution 
of pneumococcus, within nasopharynx and lungs, in an experimental system where 
the selective pressures associated with transmission were removed. This was 
achieved by serial passage of pneumococci, separately, in mouse models of 
nasopharyngeal carriage or pneumonia. Passaged pneumococci became more effective 
colonizers of the respiratory tract and we observed several examples of 
potential parallel evolution. The cell wall-modifying glycosyltransferase LafA 
was under strong selection during lung passage, whereas the surface expressed 
pneumococcal vaccine antigen gene pvaA and the glycerol-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase gene gpsA were frequent targets of mutation in 
nasopharynx-passaged pneumococci. These mutations were not identified in 
pneumococci that were separately evolved by serial passage on laboratory agar. 
We focused on gpsA, in which the same single nucleotide polymorphism arose in 
two independently evolved nasopharynx-passaged lineages. We describe a new role 
for this gene in nasopharyngeal carriage and show that the identified single 
nucleotide change confers resistance to oxidative stress and enhanced 
nasopharyngeal colonization potential. We demonstrate that polymorphisms in gpsA 
arise and are retained during human colonization. These findings highlight how 
within-host environmental conditions can determine trajectories of bacterial 
evolution. Relative invasiveness or attack rate of pneumococcal lineages may be 
defined by genes that make niche-specific contributions to bacterial fitness. 
Experimental evolution in animal infection models is a powerful tool to 
investigate the relative roles played by pathogen virulence and colonization 
factors within different host niches.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab018
PMCID: PMC8136498
PMID: 33502519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1019. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2152-2165. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab014.

Inferring Adaptive Introgression Using Hidden Markov Models.

Svedberg J(1), Shchur V(2), Reinman S(1), Nielsen R(2)(3)(4), Corbett-Detig 
R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, Genomics Institute, UC Santa Cruz, 
Santa Cruz, CA, USA.
(2)National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology and Department of Statistics, UC Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(4)Center for GeoGenetics, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Adaptive introgression-the flow of adaptive genetic variation between species or 
populations-has attracted significant interest in recent years and it has been 
implicated in a number of cases of adaptation, from pesticide resistance and 
immunity, to local adaptation. Despite this, methods for identification of 
adaptive introgression from population genomic data are lacking. Here, we 
present Ancestry_HMM-S, a hidden Markov model-based method for identifying genes 
undergoing adaptive introgression and quantifying the strength of selection 
acting on them. Through extensive validation, we show that this method performs 
well on moderately sized data sets for realistic population and selection 
parameters. We apply Ancestry_HMM-S to a data set of an admixed Drosophila 
melanogaster population from South Africa and we identify 17 loci which show 
signatures of adaptive introgression, four of which have previously been shown 
to confer resistance to insecticides. Ancestry_HMM-S provides a powerful method 
for inferring adaptive introgression in data sets that are typically collected 
when studying admixed populations. This method will enable powerful insights 
into the genetic consequences of admixture across diverse populations. 
Ancestry_HMM-S can be downloaded from 
https://github.com/jesvedberg/Ancestry_HMM-S/.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab014
PMCID: PMC8097282
PMID: 33502512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1020. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2166-2176. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab013.

Genomics Reveals the Origins of Historical Specimens.

Cong Q(1)(2), Shen J(2), Zhang J(2), Li W(2), Kinch LN(2)(3), Calhoun JV(4), 
Warren AD(4), Grishin NV(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.
(4)McGuire Center for Lepidoptera and Biodiversity, Florida Museum of Natural 
History, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.

Centuries of zoological studies have amassed billions of specimens in 
collections worldwide. Genomics of these specimens promises to reinvigorate 
biodiversity research. However, because DNA degrades with age in historical 
specimens, it is a challenge to obtain genomic data for them and analyze 
degraded genomes. We developed experimental and computational protocols to 
overcome these challenges and applied our methods to resolve a series of 
long-standing controversies involving a group of butterflies. We deduced the 
geographical origins of several historical specimens of uncertain provenance 
that are at the heart of these debates. Here, genomics tackles one of the 
greatest problems in zoology: countless old specimens that serve as 
irreplaceable embodiments of species concepts cannot be confidently assigned to 
extant species or population due to the lack of diagnostic morphological 
features and clear documentation of the collection locality. The ability to 
determine where they were collected will resolve many on-going disputes. More 
broadly, we show the utility of applying genomics to historical museum specimens 
to delineate the boundaries of species and populations, and to hypothesize about 
genotypic determinants of phenotypic traits.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab013
PMCID: PMC8097301
PMID: 33502509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1021. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1980-1994. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab001.

De Novo Mutation and Rapid Protein (Co-)evolution during Meiotic Adaptation in 
Arabidopsis arenosa.

Bohutínská M(1)(2), Handrick V(3), Yant L(3), Schmickl R(1)(2), Kolář 
F(1)(2)(4), Bomblies K(3)(5), Paajanen P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(2)Institute of Botany of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Průhonice, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, John Innes Centre, Norwich, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Botany, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Plant Evolutionary Genetics, Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular 
Plant Biology, ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.

A sudden shift in environment or cellular context necessitates rapid adaptation. 
A dramatic example is genome duplication, which leads to polyploidy. In such 
situations, the waiting time for new mutations might be prohibitive; theoretical 
and empirical studies suggest that rapid adaptation will largely rely on 
standing variation already present in source populations. Here, we investigate 
the evolution of meiosis proteins in Arabidopsis arenosa, some of which were 
previously implicated in adaptation to polyploidy, and in a diploid, habitat. A 
striking and unexplained feature of prior results was the large number of amino 
acid changes in multiple interacting proteins, especially in the relatively 
young tetraploid. Here, we investigate whether selection on meiosis genes is 
found in other lineages, how the polyploid may have accumulated so many 
differences, and whether derived variants were selected from standing variation. 
We use a range-wide sample of 145 resequenced genomes of diploid and tetraploid 
A. arenosa, with new genome assemblies. We confirmed signals of positive 
selection in the polyploid and diploid lineages they were previously reported in 
and find additional meiosis genes with evidence of selection. We show that the 
polyploid lineage stands out both qualitatively and quantitatively. Compared 
with diploids, meiosis proteins in the polyploid have more amino acid changes 
and a higher proportion affecting more strongly conserved sites. We find 
evidence that in tetraploids, positive selection may have commonly acted on de 
novo mutations. Several tests provide hints that coevolution, and in some cases, 
multinucleotide mutations, might contribute to rapid accumulation of changes in 
meiotic proteins.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab001
PMCID: PMC8097281
PMID: 33502506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1022. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2191-2208. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab017.

Bridging Themes: Short Protein Segments Found in Different Architectures.

Kolodny R(1), Nepomnyachiy S(1), Tawfik DS(2), Ben-Tal N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(3)George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 03;:

The vast majority of theoretically possible polypeptide chains do not fold, let 
alone confer function. Hence, protein evolution from preexisting building blocks 
has clear potential advantages over ab initio emergence from random sequences. 
In support of this view, sequence similarities between different proteins is 
generally indicative of common ancestry, and we collectively refer to such 
homologous sequences as "themes." At the domain level, sequence homology is 
routinely detected. However, short themes which are segments, or fragments of 
intact domains, are particularly interesting because they may provide hints 
about the emergence of domains, as opposed to divergence of preexisting domains, 
or their mixing-and-matching to form multi-domain proteins. Here we identified 
525 representative short themes, comprising 20-80 residues that are unexpectedly 
shared between domains considered to have emerged independently. Among these 
"bridging themes" are ones shared between the most ancient domains, for example, 
Rossmann, P-loop NTPase, TIM-barrel, flavodoxin, and ferredoxin-like. We 
elaborate on several particularly interesting cases, where the bridging themes 
mediate ligand binding. Ligand binding may have contributed to the stability and 
the plasticity of these building blocks, and to their ability to invade 
preexisting domains or serve as starting points for completely new domains.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab017
PMCID: PMC8136508
PMID: 33502503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1023. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):3993-4009. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab009.

Complexity of the simplest species tree problem.

Zhu T(1)(2), Yang Z(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Institute of 
Applied Mathematics, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Random Complex Structures and Data Science, Academy of 
Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, 
China.
(3)Department of Genetics, University College London, Gower Street London WC1E 
6BT, UK.

The multispecies coalescent model provides a natural framework for species tree 
estimation accounting for gene-tree conflicts. Although a number of species tree 
methods under the multispecies coalescent have been suggested and evaluated 
using simulation, their statistical properties remain poorly understood. Here, 
we use mathematical analysis aided by computer simulation to examine the 
identifiability, consistency, and efficiency of different species tree methods 
in the case of three species and three sequences under the molecular clock. We 
consider four major species-tree methods including concatenation, two-step, 
independent-sites maximum likelihood, and maximum likelihood. We develop 
approximations that predict that the probit transform of the species tree 
estimation error decreases linearly with the square root of the number of loci. 
Even in this simplest case, major differences exist among the methods. 
Full-likelihood methods are considerably more efficient than summary methods 
such as concatenation and two-step. They also provide estimates of important 
parameters such as species divergence times and ancestral population 
sizes,whereas these parameters are not identifiable by summary methods. Our 
results highlight the need to improve the statistical efficiency of summary 
methods and the computational efficiency of full likelihood methods of species 
tree estimation.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab009
PMCID: PMC8382899
PMID: 33492385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1024. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1809-1819. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa321.

Integrating Linguistics, Social Structure, and Geography to Model Genetic 
Diversity within India.

Bose A(1), Platt DE(1), Parida L(1), Drineas P(2), Paschou P(3).

Author information:
(1)Computational Genomics, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, 
NY, USA.
(2)Computer Science Department, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 
USA.

India represents an intricate tapestry of population substructure shaped by 
geography, language, culture, and social stratification. Although geography 
closely correlates with genetic structure in other parts of the world, the 
strict endogamy imposed by the Indian caste system and the large number of 
spoken languages add further levels of complexity to understand Indian 
population structure. To date, no study has attempted to model and evaluate how 
these factors have interacted to shape the patterns of genetic diversity within 
India. We merged all publicly available data from the Indian subcontinent into a 
data set of 891 individuals from 90 well-defined groups. Bringing together 
geography, genetics, and demographic factors, we developed Correlation 
Optimization of Genetics and Geodemographics to build a model that explains the 
observed population genetic substructure. We show that shared language along 
with social structure have been the most powerful forces in creating paths of 
gene flow in the subcontinent. Furthermore, we discover the ethnic groups that 
best capture the diverse genetic substructure using a ridge leverage score 
statistic. Integrating data from India with a data set of additional 1,323 
individuals from 50 Eurasian populations, we find that Indo-European and 
Dravidian speakers of India show shared genetic drift with Europeans, whereas 
the Tibeto-Burman speaking tribal groups have maximum shared genetic drift with 
East Asians.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa321
PMCID: PMC8097304
PMID: 33481022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1025. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2104-2115. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab011.

Transcription Factors Drive Opposite Relationships between Gene Age and Tissue 
Specificity in Male and Female Drosophila Gonads.

Witt E(1), Svetec N(1), Benjamin S(1), Zhao L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics and Genomics, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY, USA.

Evolutionarily young genes are usually preferentially expressed in the testis 
across species. Although it is known that older genes are generally more broadly 
expressed than younger genes, the properties that shaped this pattern are 
unknown. Older genes may gain expression across other tissues uniformly, or 
faster in certain tissues than others. Using Drosophila gene expression data, we 
confirmed previous findings that younger genes are disproportionately testis 
biased and older genes are disproportionately ovary biased. We found that the 
relationship between gene age and expression is stronger in the ovary than any 
other tissue and weakest in testis. We performed ATAC-seq on Drosophila testis 
and found that although genes of all ages are more likely to have open promoter 
chromatin in testis than in ovary, promoter chromatin alone does not explain the 
ovary bias of older genes. Instead, we found that upstream transcription factor 
(TF) expression is highly predictive of gene expression in ovary but not in 
testis. In the ovary, TF expression is more predictive of gene expression than 
open promoter chromatin, whereas testis gene expression is similarly influenced 
by both TF expression and open promoter chromatin. We propose that the testis is 
uniquely able to express younger genes controlled by relatively few TFs, whereas 
older genes with more TF partners are broadly expressed with peak expression 
most likely in the ovary. The testis allows widespread baseline expression that 
is relatively unresponsive to regulatory changes, whereas the ovary 
transcriptome is more responsive to trans-regulation and has a higher ceiling 
for gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab011
PMCID: PMC8097261
PMID: 33481021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1026. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1731-1743. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa291.

Phylogenomics of the Maverick Virus-Like Mobile Genetic Elements of Vertebrates.

Barreat JGN(1), Katzourakis A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Mavericks are virus-like mobile genetic elements found in the genomes of 
eukaryotes. Although Mavericks encode capsid morphogenesis homologs, their viral 
particles have not been observed. Here, we provide new evidence supporting the 
viral nature of Mavericks and the potential existence of virions. To this end, 
we conducted a phylogenomic analysis of Mavericks in hundreds of vertebrate 
genomes, discovering 134 elements with an intact coding capacity in 17 host 
species. We reveal an extensive genomic fossil record in 143 species and date 
three groups of elements to the Late Cretaceous. Bayesian phylogenetic analysis 
using genomic fossil orthologs suggests that Mavericks have infected 
osteichthyans for ∼419 My. They have undergone frequent cross-species 
transmissions in cyprinid fish and all core genes are subject to strong 
purifying selection. We conclude that vertebrate Mavericks form an ancient 
lineage of aquatic dsDNA viruses which are probably still functional in some 
vertebrate lineages.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa291
PMCID: PMC8097293
PMID: 33481003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1027. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2076-2087. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab008.

Recreated Ancestral Opsin Associated with Marine to Freshwater Croaker Invasion 
Reveals Kinetic and Spectral Adaptation.

Van Nynatten A(1)(2), Castiglione GM(1)(3), de A Gutierrez E(3), Lovejoy 
NR(1)(2)(3), Chang BSW(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Toronto Scarborough, 
Scarborough, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Centre for the Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Rhodopsin, the light-sensitive visual pigment expressed in rod photoreceptors, 
is specialized for vision in dim-light environments. Aquatic environments are 
particularly challenging for vision due to the spectrally dependent attenuation 
of light, which can differ greatly in marine and freshwater systems. Among fish 
lineages that have successfully colonized freshwater habitats from ancestrally 
marine environments, croakers are known as highly visual benthic predators. In 
this study, we isolate rhodopsins from a diversity of freshwater and marine 
croakers and find that strong positive selection in rhodopsin is associated with 
a marine to freshwater transition in South American croakers. In order to 
determine if this is accompanied by significant shifts in visual abilities, we 
resurrected ancestral rhodopsin sequences and tested the experimental properties 
of ancestral pigments bracketing this transition using in vitro spectroscopic 
assays. We found the ancestral freshwater croaker rhodopsin is redshifted 
relative to its marine ancestor, with mutations that recapitulate ancestral 
amino acid changes along this transitional branch resulting in faster kinetics 
that are likely to be associated with more rapid dark adaptation. This could be 
advantageous in freshwater due to the redshifted spectrum and relatively narrow 
interface and frequent transitions between bright and dim-light environments. 
This study is the first to experimentally demonstrate that positively selected 
substitutions in ancestral visual pigments alter protein function to freshwater 
visual environments following a transition from an ancestrally marine state and 
provides insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying some of the 
physiological changes associated with this major habitat transition.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab008
PMCID: PMC8097279
PMID: 33481002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1028. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2177-2178. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa305.

dadi.CUDA: Accelerating Population Genetics Inference with Graphics Processing 
Units.

Gutenkunst RN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ, USA.

dadi is a popular but computationally intensive program for inferring models of 
demographic history and natural selection from population genetic data. I show 
that running dadi on a Graphics Processing Unit can dramatically speed 
computation compared with the CPU implementation, with minimal user burden. 
Motivated by this speed increase, I also extended dadi to four- and 
five-population models. This functionality is available in dadi version 2.1.0, 
https://bitbucket.org/gutenkunstlab/dadi/.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa305
PMCID: PMC8097298
PMID: 33480999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1029. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2088-2103. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab010.

The Hunt for Ancient Prions: Archaeal Prion-Like Domains Form Amyloid-Based 
Epigenetic Elements.

Zajkowski T(1)(2)(3), Lee MD(3), Mondal SS(4), Carbajal A(2)(5), Dec R(6), 
Brennock PD(2), Piast RW(6), Snyder JE(2), Bense NB(3), Dzwolak W(6), Jarosz 
DF(7)(8), Rothschild LJ(9).

Author information:
(1)Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)University Space Research Association, Mountain View, CA, USA.
(3)Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Bioinformatics, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of 
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA.
(6)Faculty of Chemistry, Biological and Chemical Research Centre, University of 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(9)Space Science and Astrobiology Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett 
Field, CA, USA.

Prions, proteins that can convert between structurally and functionally distinct 
states and serve as non-Mendelian mechanisms of inheritance, were initially 
discovered and only known in eukaryotes, and consequently considered to likely 
be a relatively late evolutionary acquisition. However, the recent discovery of 
prions in bacteria and viruses has intimated a potentially more ancient 
evolutionary origin. Here, we provide evidence that prion-forming domains exist 
in the domain archaea, the last domain of life left unexplored with regard to 
prions. We searched for archaeal candidate prion-forming protein sequences 
computationally, described their taxonomic distribution and phylogeny, and 
analyzed their associated functional annotations. Using biophysical in vitro 
assays, cell-based and microscopic approaches, and dye-binding analyses, we 
tested select candidate prion-forming domains for prionogenic characteristics. 
Out of the 16 tested, eight formed amyloids, and six acted as protein-based 
elements of information transfer driving non-Mendelian patterns of inheritance. 
We also identified short peptides from our archaeal prion candidates that can 
form amyloid fibrils independently. Lastly, candidates that tested positively in 
our assays had significantly higher tyrosine and phenylalanine content than 
candidates that tested negatively, an observation that may help future archaeal 
prion predictions. Taken together, our discovery of functional prion-forming 
domains in archaea provides evidence that multiple archaeal proteins are capable 
of acting as prions-thus expanding our knowledge of this epigenetic phenomenon 
to the third and final domain of life and bolstering the possibility that they 
were present at the time of the last universal common ancestor.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 2021.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab010
PMCID: PMC8480180
PMID: 33480998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1030. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2057-2069. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab006.

Compatibility of Evolutionary Responses to Constituent Antibiotics Drive 
Resistance Evolution to Drug Pairs.

Jahn LJ(1), Simon D(1), Jensen M(1), Bradshaw C(1), Ellabaan MMH(1), Sommer 
MOA(1).

Author information:
(1)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of 
Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.

Antibiotic combinations are considered a relevant strategy to tackle the global 
antibiotic resistance crisis since they are believed to increase treatment 
efficacy and reduce resistance evolution (WHO treatment guidelines for 
drug-resistant tuberculosis: 2016 update.). However, studies of the evolution of 
bacterial resistance to combination therapy have focused on a limited number of 
drugs and have provided contradictory results (Lipsitch, Levin BR. 1997; 
Hegreness et al. 2008; Munck et al. 2014). To address this gap in our 
understanding, we performed a large-scale laboratory evolution experiment, 
adapting eight replicate lineages of Escherichia coli to a diverse set of 22 
different antibiotics and 33 antibiotic pairs. We found that combination therapy 
significantly limits the evolution of de novode novo resistance in E. coli, yet 
different drug combinations vary substantially in their propensity to select for 
resistance. In contrast to current theories, the phenotypic features of drug 
pairs are weak predictors of resistance evolution. Instead, the resistance 
evolution is driven by the relationship between the evolutionary trajectories 
that lead to resistance to a drug combination and those that lead to resistance 
to the component drugs. Drug combinations requiring a novel genetic response 
from target bacteria compared with the individual component drugs significantly 
reduce resistance evolution. These data support combination therapy as a 
treatment option to decelerate resistance evolution and provide a novel 
framework for selecting optimized drug combinations based on bacterial 
evolutionary responses.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab006
PMCID: PMC8097295
PMID: 33480997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1031. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1820-1836. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa322.

Maintenance of Adaptive Dynamics and No Detectable Load in a Range-Edge 
Outcrossing Plant Population.

Takou M(1), Hämälä T(2), Koch EM(3), Steige KA(1), Dittberner H(1), Yant L(4), 
Genete M(5), Sunyaev S(3), Castric V(5), Vekemans X(5), Savolainen O(6), Meaux 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Botany, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, 
MN, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(4)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United 
Kingdom.
(5)CNRS, UMR 8198 - Evo-Eco-Paleo, University of Lille, Lille, France.
(6)Department of Ecology and Genetics, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

During range expansion, edge populations are expected to face increased genetic 
drift, which in turn can alter and potentially compromise adaptive dynamics, 
preventing the removal of deleterious mutations and slowing down adaptation. 
Here, we contrast populations of the European subspecies Arabidopsis lyrata ssp. 
petraea, which expanded its Northern range after the last glaciation. We 
document a sharp decline in effective population size in the range-edge 
population and observe that nonsynonymous variants segregate at higher 
frequencies. We detect a 4.9% excess of derived nonsynonymous variants per 
individual in the range-edge population, suggesting an increase of the genomic 
burden of deleterious mutations. Inference of the fitness effects of mutations 
and modeling of allele frequencies under the explicit demographic history of 
each population predicts a depletion of rare deleterious variants in the 
range-edge population, but an enrichment for fixed ones, consistent with the 
bottleneck effect. However, the demographic history of the range-edge population 
predicts a small net decrease in per-individual fitness. Consistent with this 
prediction, the range-edge population is not impaired in its growth and survival 
measured in a common garden experiment. We further observe that the allelic 
diversity at the self-incompatibility locus, which ensures strict outcrossing 
and evolves under negative frequency-dependent selection, has remained 
unchanged. Genomic footprints indicative of selective sweeps are broader in the 
Northern population but not less frequent. We conclude that the outcrossing 
species A. lyrata ssp. petraea shows a strong resilience to the effect of range 
expansion.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa322
PMCID: PMC8097302
PMID: 33480994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1032. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2116-2130. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab015.

The Landscape of Recombination Events That Create Nonribosomal Peptide 
Diversity.

Baunach M(1), Chowdhury S(2), Stallforth P(2), Dittmann E(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, Potsdam-Golm, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Paleobiotechnology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product 
Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute (HKI), Jena, Germany.

Nonribosomal peptides (NRP) are crucial molecular mediators in microbial ecology 
and provide indispensable drugs. Nevertheless, the evolution of the flexible 
biosynthetic machineries that correlates with the stunning structural diversity 
of NRPs is poorly understood. Here, we show that recombination is a key driver 
in the evolution of bacterial NRP synthetase (NRPS) genes across distant 
bacterial phyla, which has guided structural diversification in a plethora of 
NRP families by extensive mixing and matching of biosynthesis genes. The 
systematic dissection of a large number of individual recombination events did 
not only unveil a striking plurality in the nature and origin of the exchange 
units but allowed the deduction of overarching principles that enable the 
efficient exchange of adenylation (A) domain substrates while keeping the 
functionality of the dynamic multienzyme complexes. In the majority of cases, 
recombination events have targeted variable portions of the Acore domains, yet 
domain interfaces and the flexible Asub domain remained untapped. Our results 
strongly contradict the widespread assumption that adenylation and condensation 
(C) domains coevolve and significantly challenge the attributed role of C 
domains as stringent selectivity filter during NRP synthesis. Moreover, they 
teach valuable lessons on the choice of natural exchange units in the evolution 
of NRPS diversity, which may guide future engineering approaches.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab015
PMCID: PMC8097286
PMID: 33480992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1033. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1761-1776. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa312.

The Molecular Determinants of Thermoadaptation: Methanococcales as a Case Study.

Lecocq M(1), Groussin M(2), Gouy M(1), Brochier-Armanet C(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive, Université de Lyon, 
Université Lyon 1, CNRS, UMR5558, Villeurbanne, France.
(2)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.

Previous reports have shown that environmental temperature impacts proteome 
evolution in Bacteria and Archaea. However, it is unknown whether 
thermoadaptation mainly occurs via the sequential accumulation of substitutions, 
massive horizontal gene transfers, or both. Measuring the real contribution of 
amino acid substitution to thermoadaptation is challenging, because of 
confounding environmental and genetic factors (e.g., pH, salinity, genomic G + C 
content) that also affect proteome evolution. Here, using Methanococcales, a 
major archaeal lineage, as a study model, we show that optimal growth 
temperature is the major factor affecting variations in amino acid frequencies 
of proteomes. By combining phylogenomic and ancestral sequence reconstruction 
approaches, we disclose a sequential substitutional scheme in which lysine plays 
a central role by fine tuning the pool of arginine, serine, threonine, 
glutamine, and asparagine, whose frequencies are strongly correlated with 
optimal growth temperature. Finally, we show that colonization to new thermal 
niches is not associated with high amounts of horizontal gene transfers. 
Altogether, although the acquisition of a few key proteins through horizontal 
gene transfer may have favored thermoadaptation in Methanococcales, our findings 
support sequential amino acid substitutions as the main factor driving 
thermoadaptation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa312
PMCID: PMC8097290
PMID: 33450027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1034. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1995-2013. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab002.

Functional Divergence of Multiple Duplicated Foxl2 Homeologs and Alleles in a 
Recurrent Polyploid Fish.

Gan RH(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Li Z(1)(2), Yu ZX(3), Li XY(1)(2), Tong JF(1)(2), 
Wang ZW(1)(2), Zhang XJ(1)(2), Zhou L(1)(2), Gui JF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of 
Hydrobiology, The Innovation Academy of Seed Design, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Ningxia Fisheries Research Institute, Yinchuan, China.

Evolutionary fates of duplicated genes have been widely investigated in many 
polyploid plants and animals, but research is scarce in recurrent polyploids. In 
this study, we focused on foxl2, a central player in ovary, and elaborated the 
functional divergence in gibel carp (Carassius gibelio), a recurrent 
auto-allo-hexaploid fish. First, we identified three divergent foxl2 homeologs 
(Cgfoxl2a-B, Cgfoxl2b-A, and Cgfoxl2b-B), each of them possessing three highly 
conserved alleles and revealed their biased retention/loss. Then, their abundant 
sexual dimorphism and biased expression were uncovered in 
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. Significantly, granulosa cells and three 
subpopulations of thecal cells were distinguished by cellular localization of 
CgFoxl2a and CgFoxl2b, and the functional roles and the involved process were 
traced in folliculogenesis. Finally, we successfully edited multiple foxl2 
homeologs and/or alleles by using CRISPR/Cas9. Cgfoxl2a-B deficiency led to 
ovary development arrest or complete sex reversal, whereas complete disruption 
of Cgfoxl2b-A and Cgfoxl2b-B resulted in the depletion of germ cells. Taken 
together, the detailed cellular localization and functional differences indicate 
that Cgfoxl2a and Cgfoxl2b have subfunctionalized and cooperated to regulate 
folliculogenesis and gonad differentiation, and Cgfoxl2b has evolved a new 
function in oogenesis. Therefore, the current study provides a typical case of 
homeolog/allele diversification, retention/loss, biased expression, and 
sub-/neofunctionalization in the evolution of duplicated genes driven by 
polyploidy and subsequent diploidization from the recurrent polyploid fish.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab002
PMCID: PMC8097289
PMID: 33432361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1035. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2045-2056. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msab005.

Fine-Scale Genetic Structure and Demographic History in the Miyako Islands of 
the Ryukyu Archipelago.

Matsunami M(1), Koganebuchi K(2), Imamura M(1)(3), Ishida H(4), Kimura R(4), 
Maeda S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Advanced Genomic and Laboratory Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-Cho, Japan.
(2)Advanced Medical Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of the 
Ryukyus, Nishihara-Cho, Japan.
(3)Division of Clinical Laboratory and Blood Transfusion, University of the 
Ryukyus Hospital, Nishihara-Cho, Japan.
(4)Department of Human Biology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, 
University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-Cho, Japan.

The Ryukyu Archipelago is located in the southwest of the Japanese islands and 
is composed of dozens of islands, grouped into the Miyako Islands, Yaeyama 
Islands, and Okinawa Islands. Based on the results of principal component 
analysis on genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphisms, genetic differentiation 
was observed among the island groups of the Ryukyu Archipelago. However, a 
detailed population structure analysis of the Ryukyu Archipelago has not yet 
been completed. We obtained genomic DNA samples from 1,240 individuals living in 
the Miyako Islands, and we genotyped 665,326 single-nucleotide polymorphisms to 
infer population history within the Miyako Islands, including Miyakojima, Irabu, 
and Ikema islands. The haplotype-based analysis showed that populations in the 
Miyako Islands were divided into three subpopulations located on Miyakojima 
northeast, Miyakojima southwest, and Irabu/Ikema. The results of haplotype 
sharing and the D statistics analyses showed that the Irabu/Ikema subpopulation 
received gene flows different from those of the Miyakojima subpopulations, which 
may be related with the historically attested immigration during the Gusuku 
period (900 - 500 BP). A coalescent-based demographic inference suggests that 
the Irabu/Ikema population firstly split away from the ancestral Ryukyu 
population about 41 generations ago, followed by a split of the Miyako southwest 
population from the ancestral Ryukyu population (about 16 generations ago), and 
the differentiation of the ancestral Ryukyu population into two populations 
(Miyako northeast and Okinawajima populations) about seven generations ago. Such 
genetic information is useful for explaining the population history of modern 
Miyako people and must be taken into account when performing disease association 
studies.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msab005
PMCID: PMC8097307
PMID: 33432348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1036. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1249-1261. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa282.

Antibiotic Treatment Regimes as a Driver of the Global Population Dynamics of a 
Major Gonorrhea Lineage.

Osnes MN(1), Dorp LV(2), Brynildsrud OB(1), Alfsnes K(1), Schneiders T(3), 
Templeton KE(4), Yahara K(5), Balloux F(2), Caugant DA(1), Eldholm V(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Disease Control and Environmental Health, Norwegian 
Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway.
(2)UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Division of Infection Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, NHS Lothian, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(5)Antimicrobial Resistance Research Center, National Institute of Infectious 
Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Jan 7;39(1):

The Neisseria gonorrhoeae multilocus sequence type (ST) 1901 is among the 
lineages most commonly associated with treatment failure. Here, we analyze a 
global collection of ST-1901 genomes to shed light on the emergence and spread 
of alleles associated with reduced susceptibility to extended-spectrum 
cephalosporins (ESCs). The genetic diversity of ST-1901 falls into a minor and a 
major clade, both of which were inferred to have originated in East Asia. The 
dispersal of the major clade from Asia happened in two separate waves expanding 
from ∼1987 and 1996, respectively. Both waves first reached North America, and 
from there spread to Europe and Oceania, with multiple secondary reintroductions 
to Asia. The ancestor of the second wave acquired the penA 34.001 allele, which 
significantly reduces susceptibility to ESCs. Our results suggest that the 
acquisition of this allele granted the second wave a fitness advantage at a time 
when ESCs became the key drug class used to treat gonorrhea. Following its 
establishment globally, the lineage has served as a reservoir for the repeated 
emergence of clones fully resistant to the ESC ceftriaxone, an essential drug 
for effective treatment of gonorrhea. We infer that the effective population 
sizes of both clades went into decline as treatment schemes shifted from 
fluoroquinolones via ESC monotherapy to dual therapy with ceftriaxone and 
azithromycin in Europe and the United States. Despite the inferred recent 
population size decline, the short evolutionary path from the penA 34.001 allele 
to alleles providing full ceftriaxone resistance is a cause of concern.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa282
PMCID: PMC8042733
PMID: 33432328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1037. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1943-1965. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa336.

The Centromere Histone Is Conserved and Associated with Tandem Repeats Sharing a 
Conserved 19-bp Box in the Holocentromere of Meloidogyne Nematodes.

Despot-Slade E(1), Mravinac B(1), Širca S(2), Castagnone-Sereno P(3), Plohl 
M(1), Meštrović N(1).

Author information:
(1)Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Agricultural Institute Slovenia, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)INRAE, Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, Sophia Antipolis, France.

Although centromeres have conserved function, centromere-specific histone H3 
(CenH3) and centromeric DNA evolve rapidly. The centromere drive model explains 
this phenomenon as a consequence of the conflict between fast-evolving DNA and 
CenH3, suggesting asymmetry in female meiosis as a crucial factor. We 
characterized evolution of the CenH3 protein in three closely related, polyploid 
mitotic parthenogenetic species of the Meloidogyne incognita group, and in the 
distantly related meiotic parthenogen Meloidogyne hapla. We identified 
duplication of the CenH3 gene in a putative sexual ancestral Meloidogyne. We 
found that one CenH3 (αCenH3) remained conserved in all extant species, 
including in distant Meloidogyne hapla, whereas the other evolved rapidly and 
under positive selection into four different CenH3 variants. This pattern of 
CenH3 evolution in Meloidogyne species suggests the subspecialization of CenH3s 
in ancestral sexual species. Immunofluorescence performed on mitotic Meloidogyne 
incognita revealed a dominant role of αCenH3 on its centromere, whereas the 
other CenH3s have lost their function in mitosis. The observed αCenH3 chromosome 
distribution disclosed cluster-like centromeric organization. The ChIP-Seq 
analysis revealed that in M. incognita αCenH3-associated DNA dominantly 
comprises tandem repeats, composed of divergent monomers which share a 
completely conserved 19-bp long box. Conserved αCenH3-associated DNA is also 
confirmed in the related mitotic Meloidogyne incognita group species suggesting 
preservation of both centromere protein and DNA constituents. We hypothesize 
that the absence of centromere drive in mitosis might allow for CenH3 and its 
associated DNA to achieve an equilibrium in which they can persist for long 
periods of time.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa336
PMCID: PMC8097292
PMID: 33399875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1038. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):1. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa310.

MBE Emerging Classics 2021.

Rowe H(1), Kumar S(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa310
PMCID: PMC7783162
PMID: 33399209


1039. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1966-1979. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa337.

Population Dynamics and Structural Effects at Short and Long Range Support the 
Hypothesis of the Selective Advantage of the G614 SARS-CoV-2 Spike Variant.

Trucchi E(1), Gratton P(2), Mafessoni F(3), Motta S(4), Cicconardi F(5), Mancia 
F(6), Bertorelle G(7), D'Annessa I(8), Di Marino D(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life and Environmental Science, Marche Polytechnic University, 
Ancona, Italy.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Roma, Italy.
(3)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Weizmann Institute of 
Science, Rehovot, Israel.
(4)Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
Milan, Italy.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Ferrara, 
Ferrara, Italy.
(8)Institute of Chemical Science and Technologies, SCITEC-CNR, Milan, Italy.
(9)New York-Marche Structural Biology Center (NY-MaSBiC), Marche Polytechnic 
University, Ancona, Italy.

SARS-CoV-2 epidemics quickly propagated worldwide, sorting virus genomic 
variants in newly established propagules of infections. Stochasticity in 
transmission within and between countries or an actual selective advantage could 
explain the global high frequency reached by some genomic variants. Using 
statistical analyses, demographic reconstructions, and molecular dynamics 
simulations, we show that the globally invasive G614 spike variant 1) underwent 
a significant demographic expansion in most countries explained neither by 
stochastic effects nor by overrepresentation in clinical samples, 2) increases 
the spike S1/S2 furin-like site conformational plasticity (short-range effect), 
and 3) modifies the internal motion of the receptor-binding domain affecting its 
cross-connection with other functional domains (long-range effect). Our results 
support the hypothesis of a selective advantage at the basis of the spread of 
the G614 variant, which we suggest may be due to structural modification of the 
spike protein at the S1/S2 proteolytic site, and provide structural information 
to guide the design of variant-specific drugs.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa337
PMCID: PMC7798934
PMID: 33386849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1040. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1924-1942. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa335.

Variation in Pleiotropic Hub Gene Expression Is Associated with Interspecific 
Differences in Head Shape and Eye Size in Drosophila.

Buchberger E(1), Bilen A(1), Ayaz S(1), Salamanca D(1), Matas de Las Heras C(1), 
Niksic A(1), Almudi I(2), Torres-Oliva M(1), Casares F(2), Posnien N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(2)CABD (CSIC/UPO/JA), DMC2 Unit, Pablo de Olavide University Campus, Seville, 
Spain.

Revealing the mechanisms underlying the breathtaking morphological diversity 
observed in nature is a major challenge in Biology. It has been established that 
recurrent mutations in hotspot genes cause the repeated evolution of 
morphological traits, such as body pigmentation or the gain and loss of 
structures. To date, however, it remains elusive whether hotspot genes 
contribute to natural variation in the size and shape of organs. As natural 
variation in head morphology is pervasive in Drosophila, we studied the 
molecular and developmental basis of differences in compound eye size and head 
shape in two closely related Drosophila species. We show differences in the 
progression of retinal differentiation between species and we applied 
comparative transcriptomics and chromatin accessibility data to identify the 
GATA transcription factor Pannier (Pnr) as central factor associated with these 
differences. Although the genetic manipulation of Pnr affected multiple aspects 
of dorsal head development, the effect of natural variation is restricted to a 
subset of the phenotypic space. We present data suggesting that this 
developmental constraint is caused by the coevolution of expression of pnr and 
its cofactor u-shaped (ush). We propose that natural variation in expression or 
function of highly connected developmental regulators with pleiotropic functions 
is a major driver for morphological evolution and we discuss implications on 
gene regulatory network evolution. In comparison to previous findings, our data 
strongly suggest that evolutionary hotspots are not the only contributors to the 
repeated evolution of eye size and head shape in Drosophila.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa335
PMCID: PMC8097299
PMID: 33386848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1041. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1905-1923. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa334.

Demographic History and Genomic Response to Environmental Changes in a Rapid 
Radiation of Wild Rats.

Ge D(1), Feijó A(1), Wen Z(1), Abramov AV(2)(3), Lu L(4), Cheng J(1), Pan S(5), 
Ye S(6), Xia L(1), Jiang X(7), Vogler AP(8)(9), Yang Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chaoyang District, Beijing, China.
(2)Zoological Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(3)Joint Russian-Vietnamese Tropical Research and Technological Centre, Hanoi, 
Vietnam.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Diseases Prevention and Control, National 
Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.
(5)CAS Key Lab of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(6)Center for Computational Genomics, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(8)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Silwood Park Campus, 
Ascot, United Kingdom.

For organisms to survive and prosper in a harsh environment, particularly under 
rapid climate change, poses tremendous challenges. Recent studies have 
highlighted the continued loss of megafauna in terrestrial ecosystems and the 
subsequent surge of small mammals, such as rodents, bats, lagomorphs, and 
insectivores. However, the ecological partitioning of these animals will likely 
lead to large variation in their responses to environmental change. In the 
present study, we investigated the evolutionary history and genetic adaptations 
of white-bellied rats (Niviventer Marshall, 1976), which are widespread in the 
natural terrestrial ecosystems in Asia but also known as important zoonotic 
pathogen vectors and transmitters. The southeastern Qinghai-Tibet Plateau was 
inferred as the origin center of this genus, with parallel diversification in 
temperate and tropical niches. Demographic history analyses from mitochondrial 
and nuclear sequences of Niviventer demonstrated population size increases and 
range expansion for species in Southeast Asia, and habitat generalists 
elsewhere. Unexpectedly, population increases were seen in N. eha, which 
inhabits the highest elevation among Niviventer species. Genome scans of nuclear 
exons revealed that among the congeneric species, N. eha has the largest number 
of positively selected genes. Protein functions of these genes are mainly 
related to olfaction, taste, and tumor suppression. Extensive genetic 
modification presents a major strategy in response to global changes in these 
alpine species.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa334
PMCID: PMC8097305
PMID: 33386846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1042. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1677-1690. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa315.

HAPHPIPE: Haplotype Reconstruction and Phylodynamics for Deep Sequencing of 
Intrahost Viral Populations.

Bendall ML(1), Gibson KM(1), Steiner MC(1), Rentia U(1), Pérez-Losada 
M(1)(2)(3), Crandall KA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Institute, Milken Institute School of Public Health, 
The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Milken Institute School of 
Public Health, The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)CIBIO-InBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, 
Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal.

Deep sequencing of viral populations using next-generation sequencing (NGS) 
offers opportunities to understand and investigate evolution, transmission 
dynamics, and population genetics. Currently, the standard practice for 
processing NGS data to study viral populations is to summarize all the observed 
sequences from a sample as a single consensus sequence, thus discarding valuable 
information about the intrahost viral molecular epidemiology. Furthermore, 
existing analytical pipelines may only analyze genomic regions involved in drug 
resistance, thus are not suited for full viral genome analysis. Here, we present 
HAPHPIPE, a HAplotype and PHylodynamics PIPEline for genome-wide assembly of 
viral consensus sequences and haplotypes. The HAPHPIPE protocol includes modules 
for quality trimming, error correction, de novo assembly, alignment, and 
haplotype reconstruction. The resulting consensus sequences, haplotypes, and 
alignments can be further analyzed using a variety of phylogenetic and 
population genetic software. HAPHPIPE is designed to provide users with a single 
pipeline to rapidly analyze sequences from viral populations generated from NGS 
platforms and provide quality output properly formatted for downstream 
evolutionary analyses.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa315
PMCID: PMC8042772
PMID: 33367849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1043. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1860-1873. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa331.

Folding Stability of Pax9 Intronic G-Quadruplex Correlates with Relative Molar 
Size in Eutherians.

Jara-Espejo M(1), Hawkins MTR(2), Fogalli GB(1), Line SRP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Piracicaba Dental School, University of Campinas, 
Brazil.
(2)Division of Mammals, Department of Vertebrate Zoology, National Museum of 
Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA.

Eutherian dentition has been the focus of a great deal of studies in the areas 
of evolution, development, and genomics. The development of molar teeth is 
regulated by an antero-to-posterior cascade mechanism of activators and 
inhibitors molecules, where the relative sizes of the second (M2) and third (M3) 
molars are dependent of the inhibitory influence of the first molar (M1). Higher 
activator/inhibitor ratios will result in higher M2/M1 or M3/M1. Pax9 has been 
shown to play a key role in tooth development. We have previously shown that a 
G-quadruplex in the first intron of Pax9 can modulate the splicing efficiency. 
Using a sliding window approach with we analyzed the association of the folding 
energy (Mfe) of the Pax9 first intron with the relative molar sizes in 42 
mammalian species, representing 9 orders. The Mfe of two regions located in the 
first intron of Pax9 were shown to be significantly associated with the M2/M1 
and M3/M1 areas and mesiodistal lengths. The first region is located at the 
intron beginning and can fold into a stable G4 structure, whereas the second is 
downstream the G4 and 265 bp from intron start. Across species, the first intron 
of Pax9 varied in G-quadruplex structural stability. The correlations were 
further increased when the Mfe of the two sequences were added. Our results 
indicate that this region has a role in the evolution of the mammalian dental 
pattern by influencing the relative size of the molars.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa331
PMCID: PMC8097303
PMID: 33355664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1044. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):2131-2151. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa328.

Fast and Robust Identity-by-Descent Inference with the Templated Positional 
Burrows-Wheeler Transform.

Freyman WA(1), McManus KF(1), Shringarpure SS(1), Jewett EM(1), Bryc K(1); 23 
and Me Research Team; Auton A(1).

Author information:
(1)23andMe, Inc, Sunnyvale, CA, USA.

Estimating the genomic location and length of identical-by-descent (IBD) 
segments among individuals is a crucial step in many genetic analyses. However, 
the exponential growth in the size of biobank and direct-to-consumer genetic 
data sets makes accurate IBD inference a significant computational challenge. 
Here we present the templated positional Burrows-Wheeler transform (TPBWT) to 
make fast IBD estimates robust to genotype and phasing errors. Using haplotype 
data simulated over pedigrees with realistic genotyping and phasing errors, we 
show that the TPBWT outperforms other state-of-the-art IBD inference algorithms 
in terms of speed and accuracy. For each phase-aware method, we explore the 
false positive and false negative rates of inferring IBD by segment length and 
characterize the types of error commonly found. Our results highlight the 
fragility of most phased IBD inference methods; the accuracy of IBD estimates 
can be highly sensitive to the quality of haplotype phasing. Additionally, we 
compare the performance of the TPBWT against a widely used phase-free IBD 
inference approach that is robust to phasing errors. We introduce both in-sample 
and out-of-sample TPBWT-based IBD inference algorithms and demonstrate their 
computational efficiency on massive-scale data sets with millions of samples. 
Furthermore, we describe the binary file format for TPBWT-compressed haplotypes 
that results in fast and efficient out-of-sample IBD computes against very large 
cohort panels. Finally, we demonstrate the utility of the TPBWT in a brief 
empirical analysis, exploring geographic patterns of haplotype sharing within 
Mexico. Hierarchical clustering of IBD shared across regions within Mexico 
reveals geographically structured haplotype sharing and a strong signal of 
isolation by distance. Our software implementation of the TPBWT is freely 
available for noncommercial use in the code repository 
(https://github.com/23andMe/phasedibd, last accessed January 11, 2021).

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa328
PMCID: PMC8097300
PMID: 33355662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1045. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1874-1887. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa332.

Bidirectional Genetic Control of Phenotypic Heterogeneity and Its Implication 
for Cancer Drug Resistance.

Mo N(1), Zhang X(2), Shi W(1), Yu G(2), Chen X(1), Yang JR(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control, Ministry of Education, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)RNA Biomedical Institute, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.

Negative genetic regulators of phenotypic heterogeneity, or phenotypic 
capacitors/stabilizers, elevate population average fitness by limiting deviation 
from the optimal phenotype and increase the efficacy of natural selection by 
enhancing the phenotypic differences among genotypes. Stabilizers can presumably 
be switched off to release phenotypic heterogeneity in the face of extreme or 
fluctuating environments to ensure population survival. This task could, 
however, also be achieved by positive genetic regulators of phenotypic 
heterogeneity, or "phenotypic diversifiers," as shown by recently reported 
evidence that a bacterial divisome factor enhances antibiotic resistance. We 
hypothesized that such active creation of phenotypic heterogeneity by 
diversifiers, which is functionally independent of stabilizers, is more common 
than previously recognized. Using morphological phenotypic data from 4,718 
single-gene knockout strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we systematically 
identified 324 stabilizers and 160 diversifiers and constructed a bipartite 
network between these genes and the morphological traits they control. Further 
analyses showed that, compared with stabilizers, diversifiers tended to be 
weaker and more promiscuous (regulating more traits) regulators targeting traits 
unrelated to fitness. Moreover, there is a general division of labor between 
stabilizers and diversifiers. Finally, by incorporating NCI-60 human cancer cell 
line anticancer drug screening data, we found that human one-to-one orthologs of 
yeast diversifiers/stabilizers likely regulate the anticancer drug resistance of 
human cancer cell lines, suggesting that these orthologs are potential targets 
for auxiliary treatments. Our study therefore highlights stabilizers and 
diversifiers as the genetic regulators for the bidirectional control of 
phenotypic heterogeneity as well as their distinct evolutionary roles and 
functional independence.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa332
PMCID: PMC8097262
PMID: 33355660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1046. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1888-1904. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa333.

Acoel Single-Cell Transcriptomics: Cell Type Analysis of a Deep Branching 
Bilaterian.

Duruz J(1), Kaltenrieder C(1), Ladurner P(2), Bruggmann R(3)(4), Martìnez 
P(5)(6), Sprecher SG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Zoology, University of Fribourg, 
Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Zoology and Center of Molecular Bioscience Innsbruck, University 
of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Interfaculty Bioinformatics Unit, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Departament de Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain.
(6)Institut Català de Recerca i Estudis Avancats (ICREA), Passeig de Lluís 
Companys, Barcelona, Spain.

Bilaterian animals display a wide variety of cell types, organized into defined 
anatomical structures and organ systems, which are mostly absent in 
prebilaterian animals. Xenacoelomorpha are an early-branching bilaterian phylum 
displaying an apparently relatively simple anatomical organization that have 
greatly diverged from other bilaterian clades. In this study, we use whole-body 
single-cell transcriptomics on the acoel Isodiametra pulchra to identify and 
characterize different cell types. Our analysis identifies the existence of ten 
major cell type categories in acoels all contributing to main biological 
functions of the organism: metabolism, locomotion and movements, behavior, 
defense, and development. Interestingly, although most cell clusters express 
core fate markers shared with other animal clades, we also describe a 
surprisingly large number of clade-specific marker genes, suggesting the 
emergence of clade-specific common molecular machineries functioning in distinct 
cell types. Together, these results provide novel insight into the evolution of 
bilaterian cell types and open the door to a better understanding of the origins 
of the bilaterian body plan and their constitutive cell types.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa333
PMCID: PMC8097308
PMID: 33355655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1047. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):329. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa254.

Corrigendum to: Phylogenetics Identifies Two Eumetazoan TRPM Clades and an 
Eighth TRP Family, TRP Soromelastatin (TRPS).

Himmel NJ, Gray TR, Cox DN.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2034-2044.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa254
PMCID: PMC7783163
PMID: 33349861


1048. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1653-1664. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa330.

Rampant False Detection of Adaptive Phenotypic Optimization by ParTI-Based 
Pareto Front Inference.

Sun M(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.

Organisms face tradeoffs in performing multiple tasks. Identifying the optimal 
phenotypes maximizing the organismal fitness (or Pareto front) and inferring the 
relevant tasks allow testing phenotypic adaptations and help delineate 
evolutionary constraints, tradeoffs, and critical fitness components, so are of 
broad interest. It has been proposed that Pareto fronts can be identified from 
high-dimensional phenotypic data, including molecular phenotypes such as gene 
expression levels, by fitting polytopes (lines, triangles, tetrahedrons, and so 
on), and a program named ParTI was recently introduced for this purpose. ParTI 
has identified Pareto fronts and inferred phenotypes best for individual tasks 
(or archetypes) from numerous data sets such as the beak morphologies of 
Darwin's finches and mRNA concentrations in human tumors, implying evolutionary 
optimizations of the involved traits. Nevertheless, the reliabilities of these 
findings are unknown. Using real and simulated data that lack evolutionary 
optimization, we here report extremely high false-positive rates of ParTI. The 
errors arise from phylogenetic relationships or population structures of the 
organisms analyzed and the flexibility of data analysis in ParTI that is 
equivalent to p-hacking. Because these problems are virtually universal, our 
findings cast doubt on almost all ParTI-based results and suggest that reliably 
identifying Pareto fronts and archetypes from high-dimensional phenotypic data 
are currently generally difficult.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa330
PMCID: PMC8042732
PMID: 33346805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1049. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1695-1714. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa327.

Linked by Ancestral Bonds: Multiple Whole-Genome Duplications and Reticulate 
Evolution in a Brassicaceae Tribe.

Guo X(1), Mandáková T(1), Trachtová K(1), Özüdoğru B(2), Liu J(3), Lysak MA(1).

Author information:
(1)CEITEC-Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, 
Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Hacettepe University, Beytepe, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Pervasive hybridization and whole-genome duplications (WGDs) influenced genome 
evolution in several eukaryotic lineages. Although frequent and recurrent 
hybridizations may result in reticulate phylogenies, the evolutionary events 
underlying these reticulations, including detailed structure of the ancestral 
diploid and polyploid genomes, were only rarely reconstructed. Here, we 
elucidate the complex genomic history of a monophyletic clade from the mustard 
family (Brassicaceae), showing contentious relationships to the early-diverging 
clades of this model plant family. Genome evolution in the crucifer tribe 
Biscutelleae (∼60 species, 5 genera) was dominated by pervasive hybridizations 
and subsequent genome duplications. Diversification of an ancestral diploid 
genome into several divergent but crossable genomes was followed by 
hybridizations between these genomes. Whereas a single genus (Megadenia) 
remained diploid, the four remaining genera originated by allopolyploidy 
(Biscutella, Lunaria, Ricotia) or autopolyploidy (Heldreichia). The contentious 
relationships among the Biscutelleae genera, and between the tribe and other 
early diverged crucifer lineages, are best explained by close genomic 
relatedness among the recurrently hybridizing ancestral genomes. By using 
complementary cytogenomics and phylogenomics approaches, we demonstrate that the 
origin of a monophyletic plant clade can be more complex than a parsimonious 
assumption of a single WGD spurring postpolyploid cladogenesis. Instead, 
recurrent hybridization among the same and/or closely related parental genomes 
may phylogenetically interlink diploid and polyploid genomes despite the 
incidence of multiple independent WGDs. Our results provide new insights into 
evolution of early-diverging Brassicaceae lineages and elucidate challenges in 
resolving the contentious relationships within and between land plant lineages 
with pervasive hybridization and WGDs.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa327
PMCID: PMC8097306
PMID: 33331908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1050. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1595-1607. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa326.

The American Paddlefish Genome Provides Novel Insights into Chromosomal 
Evolution and Bone Mineralization in Early Vertebrates.

Cheng P(1), Huang Y(2), Lv Y(2)(3), Du H(1), Ruan Z(2), Li C(1), Ye H(1), Zhang 
H(1), Wu J(1), Wang C(1), Ruan R(1), Li Y(2)(3), Bian C(2), You X(2), Shi C(4), 
Han K(4), Xu J(2), Shi Q(2)(5), Wei Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Biodiversity Conservation, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Affairs of P.R. China, Yangtze River Fisheries Research 
Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)Shenzhen Key Lab of Marine Genomics, Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of 
Molecular Breeding in Marine Economic Animals, BGI Academy of Marine Sciences, 
BGI Marine, BGI, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province for Fishes Conservation and Utilization in 
the Upper Reaches of the Yangtze River, Neijiang Normal University, Neijiang, 
China.
(4)BGI-Qingdao, BGI-Shenzhen, Qingdao, China.
(5)Laboratory of Marine Genomics, School of Life Sciences and Oceanography, 
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.

Sturgeons and paddlefishes (Acipenseriformes) occupy the basal position of 
ray-finned fishes, although they have cartilaginous skeletons as in 
Chondrichthyes. This evolutionary status and their morphological specializations 
make them a research focus, but their complex genomes (polyploidy and the 
presence of microchromosomes) bring obstacles and challenges to molecular 
studies. Here, we generated the first high-quality genome assembly of the 
American paddlefish (Polyodon spathula) at a chromosome level. Comparative 
genomic analyses revealed a recent species-specific whole-genome duplication 
event, and extensive chromosomal changes, including head-to-head fusions of 
pairs of intact, large ancestral chromosomes within the paddlefish. We also 
provide an overview of the paddlefish SCPP (secretory calcium-binding 
phosphoprotein) repertoire that is responsible for tissue mineralization, 
demonstrating that the earliest flourishing of SCPP members occurred at least 
before the split between Acipenseriformes and teleosts. In summary, this genome 
assembly provides a genetic resource for understanding chromosomal evolution in 
polyploid nonteleost fishes and bone mineralization in early vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa326
PMCID: PMC8042750
PMID: 33331879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1051. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1580-1594. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa325.

Like Wings of a Bird: Functional Divergence and Complementarity between HLA-A 
and HLA-B Molecules.

Di D(1), Nunes JM(1)(2), Jiang W(3), Sanchez-Mazas A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Anthropology, Genetics and Peopling History (AGP Lab), 
Department of Genetics and Evolution-Anthropology Unit, University of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (IGE3), University of Geneva 
Medical Centre (CMU), Geneva, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes are among the most polymorphic of our 
genome, as a likely consequence of balancing selection related to their central 
role in adaptive immunity. HLA-A and HLA-B genes were recently suggested to 
evolve through a model of joint divergent asymmetric selection conferring all 
human populations, including those with severe loss of diversity, an equivalent 
immune potential. However, the mechanisms by which these two genes might undergo 
joint evolution while displaying very distinct allelic profiles in populations 
are still unknown. To address this issue, we carried out extensive data analyses 
(among which factorial correspondence analysis and linear modeling) on 2,909 
common and rare HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C alleles and 200,000 simulated pathogenic 
peptides by taking into account sequence variation, predicted peptide-binding 
affinity and HLA allele frequencies in 123 populations worldwide. Our results 
show that HLA-A and HLA-B (but not HLA-C) molecules maintain considerable 
functional divergence in almost all populations, which likely plays an 
instrumental role in their immune defense. We also provide robust evidence of 
functional complementarity between HLA-A and HLA-B molecules, which display 
asymmetric relationships in terms of amino acid diversity at both inter- and 
intraprotein levels and in terms of promiscuous or fastidious peptide-binding 
specificities. Like two wings of a flying bird, the functional complementarity 
of HLA-A and HLA-B is a perfect example, in our genome, of duplicated genes 
sharing their capacity of assuming common vital functions while being submitted 
to complex and sometimes distinct environmental pressures.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa325
PMCID: PMC8355449
PMID: 33320202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1052. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1276-1291. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa286.

SLC2A12 of SLC2 Gene Family in Bird Provides Functional Compensation for the 
Loss of SLC2A4 Gene in Other Vertebrates.

Xiong Y(1)(2), Lei F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Avian genomes are small and lack some genes that are conserved in the genomes of 
most other vertebrates including nonavian sauropsids. One hypothesis stated that 
paralogs may provide biochemical or physiological compensation for certain gene 
losses; however, no functional evidence has been reported to date. By 
integrating evolutionary analysis, physiological genomics, and experimental gene 
interference, we clearly demonstrate functional compensation for gene loss. A 
large-scale phylogenetic analysis of over 1,400 SLC2 gene sequences identifies 
six new SLC2 genes from nonmammalian vertebrates and divides the SLC2 gene 
family into four classes. Vertebrates retain class III SLC2 genes but partially 
lack the more recent duplicates of classes I and II. Birds appear to have 
completely lost the SLC2A4 gene that encodes an important insulin-sensitive GLUT 
in mammals. We found strong evidence for positive selection, indicating that the 
N-termini of SLC2A4 and SLC2A12 have undergone diversifying selection in birds 
and mammals, and there is a significant correlation between SLC2A12 
functionality and basal metabolic rates in endotherms. Physiological genomics 
have uncovered that SLC2A12 expression and allelic variants are associated with 
insulin sensitivity and blood glucose levels in wild birds. Functional tests 
have indicated that SLC2A12 abrogation causes hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, 
and high relative activity, thus increasing energy expenditures that resemble a 
diabetic phenotype. These analyses suggest that the SLC2A12 gene not only 
functionally compensates insulin response for SLC2A4 loss but also affects daily 
physical behavior and basal metabolic rate during bird evolution, highlighting 
that older genes retain a higher level of functional diversification.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa286
PMCID: PMC8042760
PMID: 33316072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1053. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1777-1791. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa314.

Phylogenetic Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Data Is Difficult.

Morel B(1), Barbera P(1), Czech L(2), Bettisworth B(1), Hübner L(1)(3), 
Lutteropp S(1), Serdari D(1), Kostaki EG(4), Mamais I(5), Kozlov AM(1), Pavlidis 
P(6), Paraskevis D(4), Stamatakis A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(3)Institute for Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
Karlsruhe, Germany.
(4)Department of Hygiene Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, School of 
Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(5)Department of Health Sciences, European University Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
(6)Institute of Computer Science, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, 
Crete, Greece.

Numerous studies covering some aspects of SARS-CoV-2 data analyses are being 
published on a daily basis, including a regularly updated phylogeny on 
nextstrain.org. Here, we review the difficulties of inferring reliable 
phylogenies by example of a data snapshot comprising a quality-filtered subset 
of 8,736 out of all 16,453 virus sequences available on May 5, 2020 from 
gisaid.org. We find that it is difficult to infer a reliable phylogeny on these 
data due to the large number of sequences in conjunction with the low number of 
mutations. We further find that rooting the inferred phylogeny with some degree 
of confidence either via the bat and pangolin outgroups or by applying novel 
computational methods on the ingroup phylogeny does not appear to be credible. 
Finally, an automatic classification of the current sequences into subclasses 
using the mPTP tool for molecular species delimitation is also, as might be 
expected, not possible, as the sequences are too closely related. We conclude 
that, although the application of phylogenetic methods to disentangle the 
evolution and spread of COVID-19 provides some insight, results of phylogenetic 
analyses, in particular those conducted under the default settings of current 
phylogenetic inference tools, as well as downstream analyses on the inferred 
phylogenies, should be considered and interpreted with extreme caution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa314
PMCID: PMC7798910
PMID: 33316067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1054. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1608-1613. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa284.

A Phylodynamic Workflow to Rapidly Gain Insights into the Dispersal History and 
Dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 Lineages.

Dellicour S(1)(2), Durkin K(3), Hong SL(2), Vanmechelen B(2), Martí-Carreras 
J(2), Gill MS(2), Meex C(4), Bontems S(4), André E(2), Gilbert M(1), Walker 
C(5), Maio N(5), Faria NR(6)(7), Hadfield J(8), Hayette MP(4), Bours V(3), 
Wawina-Bokalanga T(2), Artesi M(3), Baele G(2), Maes P(2).

Author information:
(1)Spatial Epidemiology Lab (SpELL), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, 
Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical and Epidemiological Virology, Department of 
Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute for Medical 
Research, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, CHU Liège, and Medical Genomics, GIGA Research 
Center, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(5)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(7)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, J-IDEA, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Center, Seattle, WA.

Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, an unprecedented number of genomic 
sequences of SARS-CoV-2 have been generated and shared with the scientific 
community. The unparalleled volume of available genetic data presents a unique 
opportunity to gain real-time insights into the virus transmission during the 
pandemic, but also a daunting computational hurdle if analyzed with 
gold-standard phylogeographic approaches. To tackle this practical limitation, 
we here describe and apply a rapid analytical pipeline to analyze the 
spatiotemporal dispersal history and dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 lineages. As a proof 
of concept, we focus on the Belgian epidemic, which has had one of the highest 
spatial densities of available SARS-CoV-2 genomes. Our pipeline has the 
potential to be quickly applied to other countries or regions, with key benefits 
in complementing epidemiological analyses in assessing the impact of 
intervention measures or their progressive easement.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa284
PMCID: PMC7665608
PMID: 33316043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1055. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1570-1579. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa323.

Genome Reduction Is Associated with Bacterial Pathogenicity across Different 
Scales of Temporal and Ecological Divergence.

Murray GGR(1), Charlesworth J(2)(3), Miller EL(1), Casey MJ(2), Lloyd CT(2), 
Gottschalk M(4), Tucker AWD(1), Welch JJ(2), Weinert LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Département de Pathologie et Microbiologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, 
QC, Canada.

Emerging bacterial pathogens threaten global health and food security, and so it 
is important to ask whether these transitions to pathogenicity have any common 
features. We present a systematic study of the claim that pathogenicity is 
associated with genome reduction and gene loss. We compare broad-scale patterns 
across all bacteria, with detailed analyses of Streptococcus suis, an emerging 
zoonotic pathogen of pigs, which has undergone multiple transitions between 
disease and carriage forms. We find that pathogenicity is consistently 
associated with reduced genome size across three scales of divergence (between 
species within genera, and between and within genetic clusters of S. suis). 
Although genome reduction is also found in mutualist and commensal bacterial 
endosymbionts, genome reduction in pathogens cannot be solely attributed to the 
features of their ecology that they share with these species, that is, host 
restriction or intracellularity. Moreover, other typical correlates of genome 
reduction in endosymbionts (reduced metabolic capacity, reduced GC content, and 
the transient expansion of nonfunctional elements) are not consistently observed 
in pathogens. Together, our results indicate that genome reduction is a 
consistent correlate of pathogenicity in bacteria.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa323
PMCID: PMC8042751
PMID: 33313861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1056. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1837-1846. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa324.

Repeated Evolution of Inactive Pseudonucleases in a Fungal Branch of the 
Dis3/RNase II Family of Nucleases.

Ballou ER(1), Cook AG(2), Wallace EWJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Microbiology and Infection, School of Biosciences, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute for Cell Biology and SynthSys, School of Biological Sciences, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The RNase II family of 3'-5' exoribonucleases is present in all domains of life, 
and eukaryotic family members Dis3 and Dis3L2 play essential roles in RNA 
degradation. Ascomycete yeasts contain both Dis3 and inactive RNase II-like 
"pseudonucleases." The latter function as RNA-binding proteins that affect cell 
growth, cytokinesis, and fungal pathogenicity. However, the evolutionary origins 
of these pseudonucleases are unknown: What sequence of events led to their novel 
function, and when did these events occur? Here, we show how RNase II 
pseudonuclease homologs, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ssd1, are descended 
from active Dis3L2 enzymes. During fungal evolution, active site mutations in 
Dis3L2 homologs have arisen at least four times, in some cases following gene 
duplication. In contrast, N-terminal cold-shock domains and regulatory features 
are conserved across diverse dikarya and mucoromycota, suggesting that the 
nonnuclease function requires these regions. In the basidiomycete pathogenic 
yeast Cryptococcus neoformans, the single Ssd1/Dis3L2 homolog is required for 
cytokinesis from polyploid "titan" growth stages. This phenotype of 
C. neoformans Ssd1/Dis3L2 deletion is consistent with those of inactive fungal 
pseudonucleases, yet the protein retains an active site sequence signature. We 
propose that a nuclease-independent function for Dis3L2 arose in an ancestral 
hyphae-forming fungus. This second function has been conserved across hundreds 
of millions of years, whereas the RNase activity was lost repeatedly in 
independent lineages.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa324
PMCID: PMC8097288
PMID: 33313834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1057. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1306-1316. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa289.

An Experimental Test of Adaptive Introgression in Locally Adapted Populations of 
Splash Pool Copepods.

Griffiths JS(1)(2)(3), Kawji Y(3), Kelly MW(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, 
Davis, CA.
(2)Department of Wildlife, Fish, and Conservation Biology, University of 
California, Davis, Davis, CA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, 
LA.

As species struggle to keep pace with the rapidly warming climate, adaptive 
introgression of beneficial alleles from closely related species or populations 
provides a possible avenue for rapid adaptation. We investigate the potential 
for adaptive introgression in the copepod, Tigriopus californicus, by 
hybridizing two populations with divergent heat tolerance limits. We subjected 
hybrids to strong heat selection for 15 generations followed by whole-genome 
resequencing. Utilizing a hybridize evolve and resequence (HER) technique, we 
can identify loci responding to heat selection via a change in allele frequency. 
We successfully increased the heat tolerance (measured as LT50) in selected 
lines, which was coupled with higher frequencies of alleles from the southern 
(heat tolerant) population. These repeatable changes in allele frequencies 
occurred on all 12 chromosomes across all independent selected lines, providing 
evidence that heat tolerance is polygenic. These loci contained genes with lower 
protein-coding sequence divergence than the genome-wide average, indicating that 
these loci are highly conserved between the two populations. In addition, these 
loci were enriched in genes that changed expression patterns between selected 
and control lines in response to a nonlethal heat shock. Therefore, we 
hypothesize that the mechanism of heat tolerance divergence is explained by 
differential gene expression of highly conserved genes. The HER approach offers 
a unique solution to identifying genetic variants contributing to polygenic 
traits, especially variants that might be missed through other population 
genomic approaches.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa289
PMCID: PMC8042754
PMID: 33306808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1058. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1137-1150. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa280.

Suboptimal Global Transcriptional Response Increases the Harmful Effects of 
Loss-of-Function Mutations.

Kovács K(1)(2), Farkas Z(2), Bajić D(2)(3)(4)(5), Kalapis D(1)(2), Daraba A(2), 
Almási K(2), Kintses B(2)(6)(7), Bódi Z(2), Notebaart RA(8), Poyatos JF(3), 
Kemmeren P(9), Holstege FCP(9), Pál C(2), Papp B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)HCEMM-BRC Metabolic Systems Biology Lab, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Biological Research Centre, Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of 
Biochemistry, Szeged, Hungary.
(3)Logic of Genomic Systems Laboratory, Department of Systems Biology, CNB-CSIC, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT.
(5)Microbial Sciences Institute, Yale University West Campus, West Haven, CT.
(6)HCEMM-BRC Translational Microbiology Lab, Szeged, Hungary.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Szeged, 
Szeged, Hungary.
(8)Food Microbiology, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The fitness impact of loss-of-function mutations is generally assumed to reflect 
the loss of specific molecular functions associated with the perturbed gene. 
Here, we propose that rewiring of the transcriptome upon deleterious gene 
inactivation is frequently nonspecific and mimics stereotypic responses to 
external environmental change. Consequently, transcriptional response to gene 
deletion could be suboptimal and incur an extra fitness cost. Analysis of the 
transcriptomes of ∼1,500 single-gene deletion Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains 
supported this scenario. First, most transcriptomic changes are not specific to 
the deleted gene but are rather triggered by perturbations in functionally 
diverse genes. Second, gene deletions that alter the expression of 
dosage-sensitive genes are especially harmful. Third, by elevating the 
expression level of downregulated genes, we could experimentally mitigate the 
fitness defect of gene deletions. Our work shows that rewiring of genomic 
expression upon gene inactivation shapes the harmful effects of mutations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa280
PMCID: PMC7947755
PMID: 33306797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1059. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1544-1553. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa317.

Run or Die in the Evolution of New MicroRNAs-Testing the Red Queen Hypothesis on 
De Novo New Genes.

Zhao Y(1), Lu GA(1), Yang H(1), Lin P(1), Liufu Z(1), Tang T(1), Xu J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

The Red Queen hypothesis depicts evolution as the continual struggle to adapt. 
According to this hypothesis, new genes, especially those originating from 
nongenic sequences (i.e., de novo genes), are eliminated unless they evolve 
continually in adaptation to a changing environment. Here, we analyze two 
Drosophila de novo miRNAs that are expressed in a testis-specific manner with 
very high rates of evolution in their DNA sequence. We knocked out these miRNAs 
in two sibling species and investigated their contributions to different fitness 
components. We observed that the fitness contributions of miR-975 in Drosophila 
simulans seem positive, in contrast to its neutral contributions in 
D. melanogaster, whereas miR-983 appears to have negative contributions in both 
species, as the fitness of the knockout mutant increases. As predicted by the 
Red Queen hypothesis, the fitness difference of these de novo miRNAs indicates 
their different fates.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa317
PMCID: PMC8042761
PMID: 33306129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1060. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1641-1652. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa318.

A Spatially Explicit Model of Stabilizing Selection for Improving Phylogenetic 
Inference.

Beaulieu JM(1), O'Meara BC(2), Gilchrist MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR, 
USA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Tennessee, 
Knoxville, TN, USA.

Ultraconserved elements (UCEs) are stretches of hundreds of nucleotides with 
highly conserved cores flanked by variable regions. Although the selective 
forces responsible for the preservation of UCEs are unknown, they are 
nonetheless believed to contain phylogenetically meaningful information from 
deep to shallow divergence events. Phylogenetic applications of UCEs assume the 
same degree of rate heterogeneity applies across the entire locus, including 
variable flanking regions. We present a Wright-Fisher model of selection on 
nucleotides (SelON) which includes the effects of mutation, drift, and spatially 
varying, stabilizing selection for an optimal nucleotide sequence. The SelON 
model assumes the strength of stabilizing selection follows a position-dependent 
Gaussian function whose exact shape can vary between UCEs. We evaluate SelON by 
comparing its performance to a simpler and spatially invariant GTR+Γ model using 
an empirical data set of 400 vertebrate UCEs used to determine the phylogenetic 
position of turtles. We observe much improvement in model fit of SelON over the 
GTR+Γ model, and support for turtles as sister to lepidosaurs. Overall, the 
UCE-specific parameters SelON estimates provide a compact way of quantifying the 
strength and variation in selection within and across UCEs. SelON can also be 
extended to include more realistic mapping functions between sequence and 
stabilizing selection as well as allow for greater levels of rate heterogeneity. 
By more explicitly modeling the nature of selection on UCEs, SelON and similar 
approaches can be used to better understand the biological mechanisms 
responsible for their preservation across highly divergent taxa and long 
evolutionary time scales.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa318
PMCID: PMC8042768
PMID: 33306127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1061. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1792-1808. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa320.

Convergent Rewiring of the Virulence Regulatory Network Promotes Adaptation of 
Ralstonia solanacearum on Resistant Tomato.

Gopalan-Nair R(1), Jardinaud MF(1), Legrand L(1), Landry D(1), Barlet X(1), 
Lopez-Roques C(2), Vandecasteele C(2), Bouchez O(2), Genin S(1), Guidot A(1).

Author information:
(1)LIPME, Université de Toulouse, INRAE, CNRS, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(2)GeT-PlaGe, Genotoul, INRAE, US 1426, Castanet-Tolosan, France.

The evolutionary and adaptive potential of a pathogen is a key determinant for 
successful host colonization and proliferation but remains poorly known for most 
of the pathogens. Here, we used experimental evolution combined with 
phenotyping, genomics, and transcriptomics to estimate the adaptive potential of 
the bacterial plant pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum to overcome the quantitative 
resistance of the tomato cultivar Hawaii 7996. After serial passaging over 300 
generations, we observed pathogen adaptation to within-plant environment of the 
resistant cultivar but no plant resistance breakdown. Genomic sequence analysis 
of the adapted clones revealed few genetic alterations, but we provide evidence 
that all but one were gain of function mutations. Transcriptomic analyses 
revealed that even if different adaptive events occurred in independently 
evolved clones, there is convergence toward a global rewiring of the virulence 
regulatory network as evidenced by largely overlapping gene expression profiles. 
A subset of four transcription regulators, including HrpB, the activator of the 
type 3 secretion system regulon and EfpR, a global regulator of virulence and 
metabolic functions, emerged as key nodes of this regulatory network that are 
frequently targeted to redirect the pathogen's physiology and improve its 
fitness in adverse conditions. Significant transcriptomic variations were also 
detected in evolved clones showing no genomic polymorphism, suggesting that 
epigenetic modifications regulate expression of some of the virulence network 
components and play a major role in adaptation as well.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa320
PMCID: PMC8097285
PMID: 33306125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1062. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1554-1569. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa319.

Origin of a Giant Sex Chromosome.

Conte MA(1), Clark FE(1), Roberts RB(2), Xu L(3), Tao W(4), Zhou Q(3)(5), Wang 
D(4), Kocher TD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, USA.
(3)Department of Neuroscience and Developmental Biology, University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(4)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of 
Education), School of Life Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(5)MOE Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis & Protection, Life Sciences 
Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Chromosome size and morphology vary within and among species, but little is 
known about the proximate or ultimate causes of these differences. Cichlid fish 
species in the tribe Oreochromini share an unusual giant chromosome that is ∼3 
times longer than the other chromosomes. This giant chromosome functions as a 
sex chromosome in some of these species. We test two hypotheses of how this 
giant sex chromosome may have evolved. The first hypothesis proposes that it 
evolved by accumulating repetitive elements as recombination was reduced around 
a dominant sex determination locus, as suggested by canonical models of sex 
chromosome evolution. An alternative hypothesis is that the giant sex chromosome 
originated via the fusion of an autosome with a highly repetitive B chromosome, 
one of which carried a sex determination locus. We test these hypotheses using 
comparative analysis of chromosome-scale cichlid and teleost genomes. We find 
that the giant sex chromosome consists of three distinct regions based on 
patterns of recombination, gene and transposable element content, and synteny to 
the ancestral autosome. The WZ sex determination locus encompasses the last 
∼105 Mb of the 134-Mb giant chromosome. The last 47 Mb of the giant chromosome 
shares no obvious homology to any ancestral chromosome. Comparisons across 69 
teleost genomes reveal that the giant sex chromosome contains unparalleled 
amounts of endogenous retroviral elements, immunoglobulin genes, and long 
noncoding RNAs. The results favor the B chromosome fusion hypothesis for the 
origin of the giant chromosome.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa319
PMCID: PMC8042771
PMID: 33300980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1063. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1537-1543. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa316.

Assessing Uncertainty in the Rooting of the SARS-CoV-2 Phylogeny.

Pipes L(1), Wang H(1), Huelsenbeck JP(1), Nielsen R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, 
USA.
(3)Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The rooting of the SARS-CoV-2 phylogeny is important for understanding the 
origin and early spread of the virus. Previously published phylogenies have used 
different rootings that do not always provide consistent results. We investigate 
several different strategies for rooting the SARS-CoV-2 tree and provide 
measures of statistical uncertainty for all methods. We show that methods based 
on the molecular clock tend to place the root in the B clade, whereas methods 
based on outgroup rooting tend to place the root in the A clade. The results 
from the two approaches are statistically incompatible, possibly as a 
consequence of deviations from a molecular clock or excess back-mutations. We 
also show that none of the methods provide strong statistical support for the 
placement of the root in any particular edge of the tree. These results suggest 
that phylogenetic evidence alone is unlikely to identify the origin of the 
SARS-CoV-2 virus and we caution against strong inferences regarding the early 
spread of the virus based solely on such evidence.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa316
PMCID: PMC7798932
PMID: 33295605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1064. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1402-1412. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa299.

Reduced Global Genetic Differentiation of Exploited Marine Fish Species.

Gandra M(1), Assis J(1), Martins MR(1), Abecasis D(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre of Marine Sciences (CCMAR), University of the Algarve, Faro, Portugal.

Knowledge on genetic structure is key to understand species connectivity 
patterns and to define the spatiotemporal scales over which conservation 
management plans should be designed and implemented. The distribution of genetic 
diversity (within and among populations) greatly influences species ability to 
cope and adapt to environmental changes, ultimately determining their long-term 
resilience to ecological disturbances. Yet, the drivers shaping connectivity and 
structure in marine fish populations remain elusive, as are the effects of 
fishing activities on genetic subdivision. To investigate these questions, we 
conducted a meta-analysis and compiled genetic differentiation data (FST/ΦST 
estimates) for more than 170 fish species from over 200 published studies 
globally distributed. We modeled the effects of multiple life-history traits, 
distance metrics, and methodological factors on observed population 
differentiation indices and specifically tested whether any signal arising from 
different exposure to fishing exploitation could be detected. Although the 
myriad of variables shaping genetic structure makes it challenging to isolate 
the influence of single drivers, results showed a significant correlation 
between commercial importance and genetic structure, with widespread lower 
population differentiation in commercially exploited species. Moreover, models 
indicate that variables commonly used as proxy for connectivity, such as larval 
pelagic duration, might be insufficient, and suggest that deep-sea species may 
disperse further. Overall, these results contribute to the growing body of 
knowledge on marine genetic connectivity and suggest a potential effect of 
commercial fisheries on the homogenization of genetic diversity, highlighting 
the need for additional research focused on dispersal ecology to ensure 
long-term sustainability of exploited marine species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa299
PMCID: PMC8042762
PMID: 33290548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1065. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1447-1459. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa302.

Degree of Functional Divergence in Duplicates Is Associated with Distinct Roles 
in Plant Evolution.

Ezoe A(1), Shirai K(1), Hanada K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience and Bioinformatics, Kyushu Institute of Technology, 
Iizuka, Fukuoka, Japan.

Gene duplication is a major mechanism to create new genes. After gene 
duplication, some duplicated genes undergo functionalization, whereas others 
largely maintain redundant functions. Duplicated genes comprise various degrees 
of functional diversification in plants. However, the evolutionary fate of high 
and low diversified duplicates is unclear at genomic scale. To infer high and 
low diversified duplicates in Arabidopsis thaliana genome, we generated a 
prediction method for predicting whether a pair of duplicate genes was subjected 
to high or low diversification based on the phenotypes of knock-out mutants. 
Among 4,017 pairs of recently duplicated A. thaliana genes, 1,052 and 600 are 
high and low diversified duplicate pairs, respectively. The predictions were 
validated based on the phenotypes of generated knock-down transgenic plants. We 
determined that the high diversified duplicates resulting from tandem 
duplications tend to have lineage-specific functions, whereas the low 
diversified duplicates produced by whole-genome duplications are related to 
essential signaling pathways. To assess the evolutionary impact of high and low 
diversified duplicates in closely related species, we compared the retention 
rates and selection pressures on the orthologs of A. thaliana duplicates in two 
closely related species. Interestingly, high diversified duplicates resulting 
from tandem duplications tend to be retained in multiple lineages under positive 
selection. Low diversified duplicates by whole-genome duplications tend to be 
retained in multiple lineages under purifying selection. Taken together, the 
functional diversities determined by different duplication mechanisms had 
distinct effects on plant evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa302
PMCID: PMC8042753
PMID: 33290522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1066. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1529-1536. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa313.

Tracing the Genetic Legacy of the Tibetan Empire in the Balti.

Yang XY(1)(2), Rakha A(3)(4), Chen W(5)(6), Hou J(7), Qi XB(1), Shen QK(1)(8), 
Dai SS(1)(8), Sulaiman X(1), Abdulloevich NT(9), Afanasevna ME(9), Ibrohimovich 
KB(9), Chen X(10)(11), Yang WK(10)(11), Adnan A(12), Zhao RH(1), Yao 
YG(4)(8)(13), Su B(1)(8)(14), Peng MS(1)(8)(13), Zhang YP(1)(2)(8)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, China.
(3)Department of Forensic Sciences, University of Health Sciences, Lahore, 
Pakistan.
(4)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(5)College of Agronomy and Biotechnology, Yunnan Agricultural University, 
Kunming, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Alpine Ecology (LAE), Institute of Tibetan Plateau 
Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(8)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming, China.
(9)E.N. Pavlovsky Institute of Zoology and Parasitology, Academy of Sciences of 
Republic of Tajikistan, Dushanbe, Tajikistan.
(10)Research Center for Ecology and Environment of Central Asia, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Urumqi, China.
(11)Key Laboratory of Biogeography and Bioresource in Arid Land, Xinjiang 
Institute of Ecology and Geography, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Urumqi, China.
(12)Department of Human Anatomy, School of Basic Medicine, China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(13)KIZ-CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common 
Diseases, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 
China.
(14)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

The rise and expansion of Tibetan Empire in the 7th to 9th centuries AD affected 
the course of history across East Eurasia, but the genetic impact of Tibetans on 
surrounding populations remains undefined. We sequenced 60 genomes for four 
populations from Pakistan and Tajikistan to explore their demographic history. 
We showed that the genomes of Balti people from Baltistan comprised 22.6-26% 
Tibetan ancestry. We inferred a single admixture event and dated it to about 
39-21 generations ago, a period that postdated the conquest of Baltistan by the 
ancient Tibetan Empire. The analyses of mitochondrial DNA, Y, and X chromosome 
data indicated that both ancient Tibetan males and females were involved in the 
male-biased dispersal. Given the fact that the Balti people adopted Tibetan 
language and culture in history, our study suggested the impact of Tibetan 
Empire on Baltistan involved dominant cultural and minor demic diffusion.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa313
PMCID: PMC8042757
PMID: 33283852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1067. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1512-1528. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa311.

A Two-Locus System with Strong Epistasis Underlies Rapid Parasite-Mediated 
Evolution of Host Resistance.

Ameline C(1), Bourgeois Y(1)(2), Vögtli F(1), Savola E(1)(3), Andras J(1)(4), 
Engelstädter J(5), Ebert D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, Zoology, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, Ashworth Laboratories, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Clapp Laboratory, Mount Holyoke College, 
South Hadley, MA, USA.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 
Australia.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2674.

Parasites are a major evolutionary force, driving adaptive responses in host 
populations. Although the link between phenotypic response to parasite-mediated 
natural selection and the underlying genetic architecture often remains obscure, 
this link is crucial for understanding the evolution of resistance and 
predicting associated allele frequency changes in the population. To close this 
gap, we monitored the response to selection during epidemics of a virulent 
bacterial pathogen, Pasteuria ramosa, in a natural host population of Daphnia 
magna. Across two epidemics, we observed a strong increase in the proportion of 
resistant phenotypes as the epidemics progressed. Field and laboratory 
experiments confirmed that this increase in resistance was caused by selection 
from the local parasite. Using a genome-wide association study, we built a 
genetic model in which two genomic regions with dominance and epistasis control 
resistance polymorphism in the host. We verified this model by selfing host 
genotypes with different resistance phenotypes and scoring their F1 for 
segregation of resistance and associated genetic markers. Such epistatic effects 
with strong fitness consequences in host-parasite coevolution are believed to be 
crucial in the Red Queen model for the evolution of genetic recombination.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa311
PMCID: PMC8042741
PMID: 33258959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1068. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1384-1401. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa298.

Frequent Assembly of Chimeric Complexes in the Protein Interaction Network of an 
Interspecies Yeast Hybrid.

Dandage R(1)(2)(3)(4), Berger CM(1)(2)(3)(4), Gagnon-Arsenault I(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Moon KM(5), Stacey RG(5), Foster LJ(5), Landry CR(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Département de Biochimie, Microbiologie et Bio-informatique, Faculté des 
Sciences et de Génie, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)PROTEO, Le Réseau Québécois de Recherche sur la Fonction, la Structure et 
L'ingénierie des Protéines, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(3)Centre de Recherche en Données Massives (CRDM), Université Laval, Québec, QC, 
Canada.
(4)Département de Biologie, Faculté des Sciences et de Génie, Université Laval, 
Québec, QC, Canada.
(5)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, and Michael Smith 
Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Hybrids between species often show extreme phenotypes, including some that take 
place at the molecular level. In this study, we investigated the phenotypes of 
an interspecies diploid hybrid in terms of protein-protein interactions inferred 
from protein correlation profiling. We used two yeast species, Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae and Saccharomyces uvarum, which are interfertile, but yet have 
proteins diverged enough to be differentiated using mass spectrometry. Most of 
the protein-protein interactions are similar between hybrid and parents, and are 
consistent with the assembly of chimeric complexes, which we validated using an 
orthogonal approach for the prefoldin complex. We also identified instances of 
altered protein-protein interactions in the hybrid, for instance, in complexes 
related to proteostasis and in mitochondrial protein complexes. Overall, this 
study uncovers the likely frequent occurrence of chimeric protein complexes with 
few exceptions, which may result from incompatibilities or imbalances between 
the parental proteomes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa298
PMCID: PMC8042767
PMID: 33252673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1069. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1031-1039. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa272.

A Sister Lineage of Sampled Retroviruses Corroborates the Complex Evolution of 
Retroviruses.

Wang J(1), Han GZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, College of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

The origin and deep history of retroviruses remain mysterious and contentious, 
largely because the diversity of retroviruses is incompletely understood. Here, 
we report the discovery of lokiretroviruses, a novel major lineage of 
retroviruses, within the genomes of a wide range of vertebrates (at least 137 
species), including lampreys, ray-finned fishes, lobe-finned fishes, amphibians, 
and reptiles. Lokiretroviruses share a similar genome architecture with known 
retroviruses, but display some unique features. Interestingly, lokiretrovirus 
Env proteins share detectable similarity with fusion glycoproteins of viruses 
within the Mononegavirales order, blurring the boundary between retroviruses and 
negative sense single-stranded RNA viruses. Phylogenetic analyses based on 
reverse transcriptase demonstrate that lokiretroviruses are sister to all the 
retroviruses sampled to date, providing a crucial nexus for studying the deep 
history of retroviruses. Comparing congruence between host and virus phylogenies 
suggests lokiretroviruses mainly underwent cross-species transmission. Moreover, 
we find that retroviruses replaced their ribonuclease H and integrase domains 
multiple times during their evolutionary course, revealing the importance of 
domain shuffling in the evolution of retroviruses. Overall, our findings greatly 
expand our views of the diversity of retroviruses, and provide novel insights 
into the origin and complex evolutionary history of retroviruses.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa272
PMCID: PMC7947760
PMID: 33249491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1070. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1225-1240. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa306.

The Evolutionary Dynamics of Genetic Incompatibilities Introduced by Duplicated 
Genes in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Jiao WB(1), Patel V(2), Klasen J(2), Liu F(3), Pecinkova P(4)(5), Ferrand M(6), 
Gy I(6), Camilleri C(6), Effgen S(1), Koornneef M(4)(7), Pecinka A(4)(8), Loudet 
O(6), Schneeberger K(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chromosome Biology, Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding 
Research, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Plant Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Plant 
Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Breeding Research, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop 
Plant Research (IPK) Gatersleben, Stadt Seeland, Germany.
(4)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Plant 
Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany.
(5)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Palacký 
University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(6)Institut Jean-Pierre Bourgin, INRAE, AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 
Versailles, France.
(7)Laboratory of Genetics, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Institute of Experimental Botany (IEB), Czech Academy of Sciences, Centre of 
the Region Haná for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research (CRH), Olomouc, 
Czech Republic.
(9)Faculty of Biology, LMU Munich, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.

Although gene duplications provide genetic backup and allow genomic changes 
under relaxed selection, they may potentially limit gene flow. When different 
copies of a duplicated gene are pseudofunctionalized in different genotypes, 
genetic incompatibilities can arise in their hybrid offspring. Although such 
cases have been reported after manual crosses, it remains unclear whether they 
occur in nature and how they affect natural populations. Here, we identified 
four duplicated-gene based incompatibilities including one previously not 
reported within an artificial Arabidopsis intercross population. Unexpectedly, 
however, for each of the genetic incompatibilities we also identified the 
incompatible alleles in natural populations based on the genomes of 1,135 
Arabidopsis accessions published by the 1001 Genomes Project. Using the presence 
of incompatible allele combinations as phenotypes for GWAS, we mapped genomic 
regions that included additional gene copies which likely rescue the genetic 
incompatibility. Reconstructing the geographic origins and evolutionary 
trajectories of the individual alleles suggested that incompatible alleles 
frequently coexist, even in geographically closed regions, and that their 
effects can be overcome by additional gene copies collectively shaping the 
evolutionary dynamics of duplicated genes during population history.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa306
PMCID: PMC8042742
PMID: 33247726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1071. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1482-1497. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa308.

Tirant Stealthily Invaded Natural Drosophila melanogaster Populations during the 
Last Century.

Schwarz F(1)(2), Wierzbicki F(1)(2), Senti KA(1), Kofler R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Populationsgenetik, Vetmeduni Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Vienna Graduate School of Population Genetics, Vetmeduni Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.

It was long thought that solely three different transposable elements (TEs)-the 
I-element, the P-element, and hobo-invaded natural Drosophila melanogaster 
populations within the last century. By sequencing the "living fossils" of 
Drosophila research, that is, D. melanogaster strains sampled from natural 
populations at different time points, we show that a fourth TE, Tirant, invaded 
D. melanogaster populations during the past century. Tirant likely spread in 
D. melanogaster populations around 1938, followed by the I-element, hobo, and, 
lastly, the P-element. In addition to the recent insertions of the canonical 
Tirant, D. melanogaster strains harbor degraded Tirant sequences in the 
heterochromatin which are likely due to an ancient invasion, likely predating 
the split of D. melanogaster and D. simulans. These degraded insertions produce 
distinct piRNAs that were unable to prevent the novel Tirant invasion. In 
contrast to the I-element, P-element, and hobo, we did not find that Tirant 
induces any hybrid dysgenesis symptoms. This absence of apparent phenotypic 
effects may explain the late discovery of the Tirant invasion. Recent Tirant 
insertions were found in all investigated natural populations. Populations from 
Tasmania carry distinct Tirant sequences, likely due to a founder effect. By 
investigating the TE composition of natural populations and strains sampled at 
different time points, insertion site polymorphisms, piRNAs, and phenotypic 
effects, we provide a comprehensive study of a natural TE invasion.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa308
PMCID: PMC8042734
PMID: 33247725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1072. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1472-1481. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa307.

Genetic Architecture and Fitness of Bacterial Interspecies Hybrids.

Bartke K(1), Garoff L(1), Huseby DL(1), Brandis G(1), Hughes D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.

Integration of a conjugative plasmid into a bacterial chromosome can promote the 
transfer of chromosomal DNA to other bacteria. Intraspecies chromosomal 
conjugation is believed responsible for creating the global pathogens Klebsiella 
pneumoniae ST258 and Escherichia coli ST1193. Interspecies conjugation is also 
possible but little is known about the genetic architecture or fitness of such 
hybrids. To study this, we generated by conjugation 14 hybrids of E. coli and 
Salmonella enterica. These species belong to different genera, diverged from a 
common ancestor >100 Ma, and share a conserved order of orthologous genes with 
∼15% nucleotide divergence. Genomic analysis revealed that all but one hybrid 
had acquired a contiguous segment of donor E. coli DNA, replacing a homologous 
region of recipient Salmonella chromosome, and ranging in size from ∼100 to 
>4,000 kb. Recombination joints occurred in sequences with higher-than-average 
nucleotide identity. Most hybrid strains suffered a large reduction in growth 
rate, but the magnitude of this cost did not correlate with the length of 
foreign DNA. Compensatory evolution to ameliorate the cost of low-fitness 
hybrids pointed towards disruption of complex genetic networks as a cause. Most 
interestingly, 4 of the 14 hybrids, in which from 45% to 90% of the Salmonella 
chromosome was replaced with E. coli DNA, showed no significant reduction in 
growth fitness. These data suggest that the barriers to creating high-fitness 
interspecies hybrids may be significantly lower than generally appreciated with 
implications for the creation of novel species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa307
PMCID: PMC8042766
PMID: 33247724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1073. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1498-1511. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa309.

A New Catalog of Structural Variants in 1,301 A. thaliana Lines from Africa, 
Eurasia, and North America Reveals a Signature of Balancing Selection at Defense 
Response Genes.

Göktay M(1), Fulgione A(1), Hancock AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany.

Genomic variation in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana has been extensively 
used to understand evolutionary processes in natural populations, mainly 
focusing on single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Conversely, structural variation 
has been largely ignored in spite of its potential to dramatically affect 
phenotype. Here, we identify 155,440 indels and structural variants ranging in 
size from 1 bp to 10 kb, including presence/absence variants (PAVs), inversions, 
and tandem duplications in 1,301 A. thaliana natural accessions from Morocco, 
Madeira, Europe, Asia, and North America. We show evidence for strong purifying 
selection on PAVs in genes, in particular for housekeeping genes and homeobox 
genes, and we find that PAVs are concentrated in defense-related genes (R-genes, 
secondary metabolites) and F-box genes. This implies the presence of a "core" 
genome underlying basic cellular processes and a "flexible" genome that includes 
genes that may be important in spatially or temporally varying selection. 
Further, we find an excess of intermediate frequency PAVs in defense response 
genes in nearly all populations studied, consistent with a history of balancing 
selection on this class of genes. Finally, we find that PAVs in genes involved 
in the cold requirement for flowering (vernalization) and drought response are 
strongly associated with temperature at the sites of origin.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa309
PMCID: PMC8042739
PMID: 33247723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1074. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1413-1427. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa300.

Odorant Receptors for Detecting Flowering Plant Cues Are Functionally Conserved 
across Moths and Butterflies.

Guo M(1)(2), Du L(1), Chen Q(1), Feng Y(1), Zhang J(1), Zhang X(1), Tian K(1), 
Cao S(1), Huang T(1), Jacquin-Joly E(3), Wang G(1)(2), Liu Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biology of Plant Diseases and Insect Pests, 
Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture (Shenzhen Branch), Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Genomics 
Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen, 
China.
(3)INRAE, Sorbonne Université, CNRS, IRD, UPEC, Université de Paris, Institute 
of Ecology and Environmental Sciences of Paris, Versailles, France.

Odorant receptors (ORs) are essential for plant-insect interactions. However, 
despite the global impacts of Lepidoptera (moths and butterflies) as major 
herbivores and pollinators, little functional data are available about 
Lepidoptera ORs involved in plant-volatile detection. Here, we initially 
characterized the plant-volatile-sensing function(s) of 44 ORs from the cotton 
bollworm Helicoverpa armigera, and subsequently conducted a large-scale 
comparative analysis that establishes how most orthologous ORs have functionally 
diverged among closely related species whereas some rare ORs are functionally 
conserved. Specifically, our systematic analysis of H. armigera ORs cataloged 
the wide functional scope of the H. armigera OR repertoire, and also showed that 
HarmOR42 and its Spodoptera littoralis ortholog are functionally conserved. 
Pursuing this, we characterized the HarmOR42-orthologous ORs from 11 species 
across the Glossata suborder and confirmed the HarmOR42 orthologs form a unique 
OR lineage that has undergone strong purifying selection in Glossata species and 
whose members are tuned with strong specificity to phenylacetaldehyde, a floral 
scent component common to most angiosperms. In vivo studies via HarmOR42 
knockout support that HarmOR42-related ORs are essential for host-detection by 
sensing phenylacetaldehyde. Our work also supports that these ORs coevolved with 
the tube-like proboscis, and has maintained functional stability throughout the 
long-term coexistence of Lepidoptera with angiosperms. Thus, beyond providing a 
rich empirical resource for delineating the precise functions of H. armigera 
ORs, our results enable a comparative analysis of insect ORs that have 
apparently facilitated and currently sustain the intimate adaptations and 
ecological interactions among nectar feeding insects and flowering plants.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa300
PMCID: PMC8042770
PMID: 33231630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1075. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1292-1305. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa287.

Evolution of Hominin Detoxification: Neanderthal and Modern Human Ah Receptor 
Respond Similarly to TCDD.

Aarts JMMJG(1)(2), Alink GM(1), Franssen HJ(2), Roebroeks W(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Origins Group, Faculty of Archaeology, Leiden University, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen 
University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

In studies of hominin adaptations to fire use, the role of the aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor (AHR) in the evolution of detoxification has been highlighted, 
including statements that the modern human AHR confers a significantly better 
capacity to deal with toxic smoke components than the Neanderthal AHR. To 
evaluate this, we compared the AHR-controlled induction of cytochrome P4501A1 
(CYP1A1) mRNA in HeLa human cervix epithelial adenocarcinoma cells transfected 
with an Altai-Neanderthal or a modern human reference AHR expression construct, 
and exposed to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). We compared the 
complete AHR mRNA sequences including the untranslated regions (UTRs), 
maintaining the original codon usage. We observe no significant difference in 
CYP1A1 induction by TCDD between Neanderthal and modern human AHR, whereas a 
150-1,000 times difference was previously reported in a study of the AHR coding 
region optimized for mammalian codon usage and expressed in rat cells. Our study 
exemplifies that expression in a homologous cellular background is of major 
importance to determine (ancient) protein activity. The Neanderthal and modern 
human dose-response curves almost coincide, except for a slightly higher 
extrapolated maximum for the Neanderthal AHR, possibly caused by a 5'-UTR 
G-variant known from modern humans (rs7796976). Our results are strongly at odds 
with a major role of the modern human AHR in the evolution of hominin 
detoxification of smoke components and consistent with our previous study based 
on 18 relevant genes in addition to AHR, which concluded that efficient 
detoxification alleles are more dominant in ancient hominins, chimpanzees, and 
gorillas than in modern humans.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa287
PMCID: PMC8042735
PMID: 33230523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1076. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1460-1471. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa303.

Origins and Long-Term Patterns of Copy-Number Variation in Rhesus Macaques.

Thomas GWC(1), Wang RJ(2), Nguyen J(3), Alan Harris R(4)(5), Raveendran M(4)(5), 
Rogers J(4)(5), Hahn MW(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.
(4)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.

Mutations play a key role in the development of disease in an individual and the 
evolution of traits within species. Recent work in humans and other primates has 
clarified the origins and patterns of single-nucleotide variants, showing that 
most arise in the father's germline during spermatogenesis. It remains unknown 
whether larger mutations, such as deletions and duplications of hundreds or 
thousands of nucleotides, follow similar patterns. Such mutations lead to 
copy-number variation (CNV) within and between species, and can have profound 
effects by deleting or duplicating genes. Here, we analyze patterns of CNV 
mutations in 32 rhesus macaque individuals from 14 parent-offspring trios. We 
find the rate of CNV mutations per generation is low (less than one per genome) 
and we observe no correlation between parental age and the number of CNVs that 
are passed on to offspring. We also examine segregating CNVs within the rhesus 
macaque sample and compare them to a similar data set from humans, finding that 
both species have far more segregating deletions than duplications. We contrast 
this with long-term patterns of gene copy-number evolution between 17 mammals, 
where the proportion of deletions that become fixed along the macaque lineage is 
much smaller than the proportion of segregating deletions. These results suggest 
purifying selection acting on deletions, such that the majority of them are 
removed from the population over time. Rhesus macaques are an important 
biomedical model organism, so these results will aid in our understanding of 
this species and the disease models it supports.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa303
PMCID: PMC8042740
PMID: 33226085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1077. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1744-1760. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa304.

Photoreceptor Diversification Accompanies the Evolution of Anthozoa.

Gornik SG(1), Bergheim BG(1), Morel B(2), Stamatakis A(2)(3), Foulkes NS(1)(4), 
Guse A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Organismal Studies, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Institute for Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
Karlsruhe, Germany.
(4)Institute of Biological and Chemical Systems, Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany.

Anthozoan corals are an ecologically important group of cnidarians, which power 
the productivity of reef ecosystems. They are sessile, inhabit shallow, tropical 
oceans and are highly dependent on sun- and moonlight to regulate sexual 
reproduction, phototaxis, and photosymbiosis. However, their exposure to high 
levels of sunlight also imposes an increased risk of UV-induced DNA damage. How 
have these challenging photic environments influenced photoreceptor evolution 
and function in these animals? To address this question, we initially screened 
the cnidarian photoreceptor repertoire for Anthozoa-specific signatures by a 
broad-scale evolutionary analysis. We compared transcriptomic data of more than 
36 cnidarian species and revealed a more diverse photoreceptor repertoire in the 
anthozoan subphylum than in the subphylum Medusozoa. We classified the three 
principle opsin classes into distinct subtypes and showed that Anthozoa retained 
all three classes, which diversified into at least six subtypes. In contrast, in 
Medusozoa, only one class with a single subtype persists. Similarly, in 
Anthozoa, we documented three photolyase classes and two cryptochrome (CRY) 
classes, whereas CRYs are entirely absent in Medusozoa. Interestingly, we also 
identified one anthozoan CRY class, which exhibited unique tandem duplications 
of the core functional domains. We next explored the functionality of anthozoan 
photoreceptors in the model species Exaiptasia diaphana (Aiptasia), which 
recapitulates key photo-behaviors of corals. We show that the diverse opsin 
genes are differentially expressed in important life stages common to 
reef-building corals and Aiptasia and that CRY expression is light regulated. We 
thereby provide important clues linking coral evolution with photoreceptor 
diversification.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa304
PMCID: PMC8097283
PMID: 33226083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1078. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3397-3398. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa269.

MBE Transitions to the Open Access Publication Model in 2021.

Kumar S(1)(2), Rowe H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.

From the first day of 2021, all manuscripts published in the journal Molecular 
Biology and Evolution (MBE) will be freely accessible online without a 
subscription. This exciting change will make all the MBE content available to 
all readers immediately upon publication.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa269
PMCID: PMC7743896
PMID: 33225356


1079. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3118-3130. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa150.

Variable Spontaneous Mutation and Loss of Heterozygosity among Heterozygous 
Genomes in Yeast.

Nguyen DT(1), Wu B(1), Long H(2), Zhang N(1), Patterson C(3), Simpson S(4), 
Morris K(4), Thomas WK(4), Lynch M(5), Hao W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.
(2)Institute of Evolution and Marine Biodiversity, KLMME, Ocean University of 
China, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China.
(3)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
(4)University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH.
(5)Center for Mechanisms of Evolution, The Biodesign Institute, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ.

Mutation and recombination are the primary sources of genetic variation. To 
better understand the evolution of genetic variation, it is crucial to 
comprehensively investigate the processes involving mutation accumulation and 
recombination. In this study, we performed mutation accumulation experiments on 
four heterozygous diploid yeast species in the Saccharomycodaceae family to 
determine spontaneous mutation rates, mutation spectra, and losses of 
heterozygosity (LOH). We observed substantial variation in mutation rates and 
mutation spectra. We also observed high LOH rates (1.65-11.07×10-6 events per 
heterozygous site per cell division). Biases in spontaneous mutation and LOH 
together with selection ultimately shape the variable genome-wide nucleotide 
landscape in yeast species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa150
PMCID: PMC7825102
PMID: 33219379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1080. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1122-1136. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa279.

Genomic Analysis Revealed a Convergent Evolution of LINE-1 in Coat Color: A Case 
Study in Water Buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis).

Liang D(1), Zhao P(1), Si J(1), Fang L(2), Pairo-Castineira E(2), Hu X(3), Xu 
Q(4), Hou Y(5), Gong Y(6), Liang Z(7), Tian B(8), Mao H(9), Yindee M(10), 
Faruque MO(11), Kongvongxay S(12), Khamphoumee S(12), Liu GE(13), Wu DD(14), 
Barker JSF(15), Han J(16)(17), Zhang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, Key Laboratory of Animal 
Genetics and Breeding and Reproduction of MOAR, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(2)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit at the Medical Research Council 
Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)State Key Laboratory of AgroBiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.
(4)College of Life Sciences and Bioengineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, 
Beijing, China.
(5)Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(6)Guizhou Domestic Animal Genetic Resources Management Station, Guiyang, China.
(7)Agriculture and Rural Affairs Bureau of Fenggang County, Zunyi, China.
(8)Animal Disease Prevention and Control Station of Zunyi City, Zunyi, China.
(9)College of Animal Science and Technology, Yunnan Agricultural University, 
Kunming, China.
(10)Akkhararatchakumari Veterinary College (AVC), Walailak University, Nakorn Si 
Thammarat, Thailand.
(11)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Bangladesh Agricultural 
University, Mymensingh, Bangladesh.
(12)Livestock Research Center, National Agriculture and Forestry Research 
Institute, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Vientiane, Lao PDR.
(13)Animal Genomics and Improvement Laboratory, Henry A. Wallace Beltsville 
Agricultural Research Center, Agricultural Research Service, USDA, Beltsville, 
MD.
(14)Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(15)School of Environmental and Rural Science, University of New England, 
Armidale, NSW, Australia.
(16)International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), Nairobi, Kenya.
(17)CAAS-ILRI Joint Laboratory on Livestock and Forage Genetic Resources, 
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), 
Beijing, China.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 19;38(6):2673.

Visible pigmentation phenotypes can be used to explore the regulation of gene 
expression and the evolution of coat color patterns in animals. Here, we 
performed whole-genome and RNA sequencing and applied genome-wide association 
study, comparative population genomics and biological experiments to show that 
the 2,809-bp-long LINE-1 insertion in the ASIP (agouti signaling protein) gene 
is the causative mutation for the white coat phenotype in swamp buffalo (Bubalus 
bubalis). This LINE-1 insertion (3' truncated and containing only 5' UTR) 
functions as a strong proximal promoter that leads to a 10-fold increase in the 
transcription of ASIP in white buffalo skin. The 165 bp of 5' UTR transcribed 
from the LINE-1 is spliced into the first coding exon of ASIP, resulting in a 
chimeric transcript. The increased expression of ASIP prevents melanocyte 
maturation, leading to the absence of pigment in white buffalo skin and hairs. 
Phylogenetic analyses indicate that the white buffalo-specific ASIP allele 
originated from a recent genetic transposition event in swamp buffalo. 
Interestingly, as a similar LINE-1 insertion has been identified in the cattle 
ASIP gene, we discuss the convergent mechanism of coat color evolution in the 
Bovini tribe.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa279
PMCID: PMC7947781
PMID: 33212507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1081. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1262-1275. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa283.

Phenotypic Plasticity Contributes to Maize Adaptation and Heterosis.

Liu N(1)(2), Du Y(2), Warburton ML(3), Xiao Y(2), Yan J(2).

Author information:
(1)Horticulture Biology and Metabolomics Center, Haixia Institute of Science and 
Technology, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China.
(2)National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(3)United States Department of Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service: Corn 
Host Plant Resistance Research Unit, Mississippi State, MS.

Plant phenotypic plasticity describes altered phenotypic performance of an 
individual when grown in different environments. Exploring genetic architecture 
underlying plant plasticity variation may help mitigate the detrimental effects 
of a rapidly changing climate on agriculture, but little research has been done 
in this area to date. In the present study, we established a population of 976 
maize F1 hybrids by crossing 488 diverse inbred lines with two elite testers. 
Genome-wide association study identified hundreds of quantitative trait loci 
associated with phenotypic plasticity variation across diverse F1 hybrids, the 
majority of which contributed very little variance, in accordance with the 
polygenic nature of these traits. We identified several quantitative trait locus 
regions that may have been selected during the tropical-temperate adaptation 
process. We also observed heterosis in terms of phenotypic plasticity, in 
addition to the traditional genetic value differences measured between hybrid 
and inbred lines, and the pattern of which was affected by genetic background. 
Our results demonstrate a landscape of phenotypic plasticity in maize, which 
will aid in the understanding of its genetic architecture, its contribution to 
adaptation and heterosis, and how it may be exploited for future maize breeding 
in a rapidly changing environment.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa283
PMCID: PMC8480182
PMID: 33212480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1082. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1428-1446. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa301.

Genomic Analysis Enlightens Agaricales Lifestyle Evolution and Increasing 
Peroxidase Diversity.

Ruiz-Dueñas FJ(1), Barrasa JM(2), Sánchez-García M(3), Camarero S(1), Miyauchi 
S(4), Serrano A(1), Linde D(1), Babiker R(1), Drula E(5), Ayuso-Fernández I(1), 
Pacheco R(1), Padilla G(1), Ferreira P(6), Barriuso J(1), Kellner H(7), 
Castanera R(8), Alfaro M(8), Ramírez L(8), Pisabarro AG(8), Riley R(9), Kuo 
A(9), Andreopoulos W(9), LaButti K(9), Pangilinan J(9), Tritt A(9), Lipzen A(9), 
He G(9), Yan M(9), Ng V(9), Grigoriev IV(9)(10), Cullen D(11), Martin F(4), 
Rosso MN(12), Henrissat B(5)(13), Hibbett D(3), Martínez AT(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas Margarita Salas (CIB), CSIC, Madrid, 
Spain.
(2)Life Sciences Department, Alcalá University, Alcalá de Henares, Spain.
(3)Biology Department, Clark University, Worcester, MA, USA.
(4)INRAE, Laboratory of Excellence ARBRE, Champenoux, France.
(5)Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques, CNRS/Aix-Marseille 
University, Marseille, France.
(6)Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology Department and BIFI, Zaragoza 
University, Zaragoza, Spain.
(7)International Institute Zittau, Technische Universität Dresden, Zittau, 
Germany.
(8)Institute for Multidisciplinary Research in Applied Biology, IMAB-UPNA, 
Pamplona, Spain.
(9)US Department of Energy (DOE) Joint Genome Institute (JGI), Lawrence Berkeley 
National Lab, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(11)Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, Madison, WI, USA.
(12)INRAE, Biodiversité et Biotechnologie Fongiques, Aix-Marseille University, 
Marseille, France.
(13)Department of Biological Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.

As actors of global carbon cycle, Agaricomycetes (Basidiomycota) have developed 
complex enzymatic machineries that allow them to decompose all plant polymers, 
including lignin. Among them, saprotrophic Agaricales are characterized by an 
unparalleled diversity of habitats and lifestyles. Comparative analysis of 52 
Agaricomycetes genomes (14 of them sequenced de novo) reveals that Agaricales 
possess a large diversity of hydrolytic and oxidative enzymes for lignocellulose 
decay. Based on the gene families with the predicted highest evolutionary 
rates-namely cellulose-binding CBM1, glycoside hydrolase GH43, lytic 
polysaccharide monooxygenase AA9, class-II peroxidases, glucose-methanol-choline 
oxidase/dehydrogenases, laccases, and unspecific peroxygenases-we reconstructed 
the lifestyles of the ancestors that led to the extant 
lignocellulose-decomposing Agaricomycetes. The changes in the enzymatic toolkit 
of ancestral Agaricales are correlated with the evolution of their ability to 
grow not only on wood but also on leaf litter and decayed wood, with 
grass-litter decomposers as the most recent eco-physiological group. In this 
context, the above families were analyzed in detail in connection with lifestyle 
diversity. Peroxidases appear as a central component of the enzymatic toolkit of 
saprotrophic Agaricomycetes, consistent with their essential role in lignin 
degradation and high evolutionary rates. This includes not only 
expansions/losses in peroxidase genes common to other basidiomycetes but also 
the widespread presence in Agaricales (and Russulales) of new peroxidases types 
not found in wood-rotting Polyporales, and other Agaricomycetes orders. 
Therefore, we analyzed the peroxidase evolution in Agaricomycetes by 
ancestral-sequence reconstruction revealing several major evolutionary pathways 
and mapped the appearance of the different enzyme types in a time-calibrated 
species tree.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa301
PMCID: PMC8480192
PMID: 33211093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1083. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1372-1383. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa297.

Eusociality Shapes Convergent Patterns of Molecular Evolution across 
Mitochondrial Genomes of Snapping Shrimps.

Chak STC(1)(2), Baeza JA(3)(4)(5), Barden P(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, New Jersey Institute of Technology, 
Newark, NJ.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, SUNY College at Old Westbury, Old 
Westbury, NY.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC.
(4)Smithsonian Institution, Smithsonian Marine Station at Fort Pierce, Fort 
Pierce, FL.
(5)Departamento de Biología Marina, Facultad de Ciencias del Mar, Universidad 
Católica del Norte, Coquimbo, Chile.
(6)Division of Invertebrate Zoology, American Museum of Natural History, New 
York, NY.

Eusociality is a highly conspicuous and ecologically impactful behavioral 
syndrome that has evolved independently across multiple animal lineages. So far, 
comparative genomic analyses of advanced sociality have been mostly limited to 
insects. Here, we study the only clade of animals known to exhibit eusociality 
in the marine realm-lineages of socially diverse snapping shrimps in the genus 
Synalpheus. To investigate the molecular impact of sociality, we assembled the 
mitochondrial genomes of eight Synalpheus species that represent three 
independent origins of eusociality and analyzed patterns of molecular evolution 
in protein-coding genes. Synonymous substitution rates are lower and potential 
signals of relaxed purifying selection are higher in eusocial relative to 
noneusocial taxa. Our results suggest that mitochondrial genome evolution was 
shaped by eusociality-linked traits-extended generation times and reduced 
effective population sizes that are hallmarks of advanced animal societies. This 
is the first direct evidence of eusociality impacting genome evolution in marine 
taxa. Our results also strongly support the idea that eusociality can shape 
genome evolution through profound changes in life history and demography.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa297
PMCID: PMC8480187
PMID: 33211078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1084. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1665-1676. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa296.

dbCNS: A New Database for Conserved Noncoding Sequences.

Inoue J(1)(2), Saitou N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Population Genetics Laboratory, Department of Genomics and Evolutionary 
Biology, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima, Japan.
(2)Center for Earth Surface System Dynamics, Atmosphere and Ocean Research 
Institute, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan.
(3)Department of Okinawa Bioinformation Bank, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.

We developed dbCNS (http://yamasati.nig.ac.jp/dbcns), a new database for 
conserved noncoding sequences (CNSs). CNSs exist in many eukaryotes and are 
assumed to be involved in protein expression control. Version 1 of dbCNS, 
introduced here, includes a powerful and precise CNS identification pipeline for 
multiple vertebrate genomes. Mutations in CNSs may induce morphological changes 
and cause genetic diseases. For this reason, many vertebrate CNSs have been 
identified, with special reference to primate genomes. We integrated ∼6.9 
million CNSs from many vertebrate genomes into dbCNS, which allows users to 
extract CNSs near genes of interest using keyword searches. In addition to CNSs, 
dbCNS contains published genome sequences of 161 species. With purposeful 
taxonomic sampling of genomes, users can employ CNSs as queries to reconstruct 
CNS alignments and phylogenetic trees, to evaluate CNS modifications, 
acquisitions, and losses, and to roughly identify species with CNSs having 
accelerated substitution rates. dbCNS also produces links to dbSNP for searching 
pathogenic single-nucleotide polymorphisms in human CNSs. Thus, dbCNS connects 
morphological changes with genetic diseases. A test analysis using 38 
gnathostome genomes was accomplished within 30 s. dbCNS results can evaluate 
CNSs identified by other stand-alone programs using genome-scale data.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa296
PMCID: PMC8042745
PMID: 33196844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1085. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1627-1640. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa295.

Properties of Markov Chain Monte Carlo Performance across Many Empirical 
Alignments.

Harrington SM(1), Wishingrad V(1), Thomson RC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Hawai'i, Honolulu, HI.

Nearly all current Bayesian phylogenetic applications rely on Markov chain Monte 
Carlo (MCMC) methods to approximate the posterior distribution for trees and 
other parameters of the model. These approximations are only reliable if Markov 
chains adequately converge and sample from the joint posterior distribution. 
Although several studies of phylogenetic MCMC convergence exist, these have 
focused on simulated data sets or select empirical examples. Therefore, much 
that is considered common knowledge about MCMC in empirical systems derives from 
a relatively small family of analyses under ideal conditions. To address this, 
we present an overview of commonly applied phylogenetic MCMC diagnostics and an 
assessment of patterns of these diagnostics across more than 18,000 empirical 
analyses. Many analyses appeared to perform well and failures in convergence 
were most likely to be detected using the average standard deviation of split 
frequencies, a diagnostic that compares topologies among independent chains. 
Different diagnostics yielded different information about failed convergence, 
demonstrating that multiple diagnostics must be employed to reliably detect 
problems. The number of taxa and average branch lengths in analyses have clear 
impacts on MCMC performance, with more taxa and shorter branches leading to more 
difficult convergence. We show that the usage of models that include both 
Γ-distributed among-site rate variation and a proportion of invariable sites is 
not broadly problematic for MCMC convergence but is also unnecessary. Changes to 
heating and the usage of model-averaged substitution models can both offer 
improved convergence in some cases, but neither are a panacea.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa295
PMCID: PMC8042746
PMID: 33185685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1086. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1356-1371. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa294.

Three Signatures of Adaptive Polymorphism Exemplified by Malaria-Associated 
Genes.

Tennessen JA(1), Duraisingh MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA.

Malaria has been one of the strongest selective pressures on our species. Many 
of the best-characterized cases of adaptive evolution in humans are in genes 
tied to malaria resistance. However, the complex evolutionary patterns at these 
genes are poorly captured by standard scans for nonneutral evolution. Here, we 
present three new statistical tests for selection based on population genetic 
patterns that are observed more than once among key malaria resistance loci. We 
assess these tests using forward-time evolutionary simulations and apply them to 
global whole-genome sequencing data from humans, and thus we show that they are 
effective at distinguishing selection from neutrality. Each test captures a 
distinct evolutionary pattern, here called Divergent Haplotypes, Repeated 
Shifts, and Arrested Sweeps, associated with a particular period of human 
prehistory. We clarify the selective signatures at known malaria-relevant genes 
and identify additional genes showing similar adaptive evolutionary patterns. 
Among our top outliers, we see a particular enrichment for genes involved in 
erythropoiesis and for genes previously associated with malaria resistance, 
consistent with a major role for malaria in shaping these patterns of genetic 
diversity. Polymorphisms at these genes are likely to impact resistance to 
malaria infection and contribute to ongoing host-parasite coevolutionary 
dynamics.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa294
PMCID: PMC8042748
PMID: 33185667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1087. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1339-1355. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa293.

Diversification of Fungal Chitinases and Their Functional Differentiation in 
Histoplasma capsulatum.

Goughenour KD(1), Whalin J(1), Slot JC(2), Rappleye CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

Chitinases enzymatically hydrolyze chitin, a highly abundant and utilized 
polymer of N-acetyl-glucosamine. Fungi are a rich source of chitinases; however, 
the phylogenetic and functional diversity of fungal chitinases are not well 
understood. We surveyed fungal chitinases from 373 publicly available genomes, 
characterized domain architecture, and conducted phylogenetic analyses of the 
glycoside hydrolase (GH18) domain. This large-scale analysis does not support 
the previous division of fungal chitinases into three major clades (A, B, C) as 
chitinases previously assigned to the "C" clade are not resolved as distinct 
from the "A" clade. Fungal chitinase diversity was partly shaped by horizontal 
gene transfer, and at least one clade of bacterial origin occurs among 
chitinases previously assigned to the "B" clade. Furthermore, chitin-binding 
domains (including the LysM domain) do not define specific clades, but instead 
are found more broadly across clades of chitinases. To gain insight into 
biological function diversity, we characterized all eight chitinases (Cts) from 
the thermally dimorphic fungus, Histoplasma capsulatum: six A clade, one B 
clade, and one formerly classified C clade chitinases. Expression analyses 
showed variable induction of chitinase genes in the presence of chitin but 
preferential expression of CTS3 in the mycelial stage. Activity assays 
demonstrated that Cts1 (B-I), Cts2 (A-V), Cts3 (A-V), Cts4 (A-V) have 
endochitinase activities with varying degrees of chitobiosidase function. Cts6 
(C-I) has activity consistent with N-acetyl-glucosaminidase exochitinase 
function and Cts8 (A-II) has chitobiase activity. These results suggest 
chitinase activity is variable even within subclades and that predictions of 
functionality require more sophisticated models.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa293
PMCID: PMC8042737
PMID: 33185664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1088. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1060-1074. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa274.

Evolution of Embryo Implantation Was Enabled by the Origin of Decidual Stromal 
Cells in Eutherian Mammals.

Chavan AR(1)(2), Griffith OW(1)(2)(3), Stadtmauer DJ(1)(2), Maziarz J(1)(2), 
Pavlicev M(4), Fishman R(5), Koren L(5), Romero R(6)(7)(8)(9)(10)(11), Wagner 
GP(1)(2)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT.
(2)Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, 
Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(6)Perinatology Research Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal-Fetal 
Medicine, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, and Detroit, MI.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI.
(8)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI.
(9)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
MI.
(10)Detroit Medical Center, Detroit, MI.
(11)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Florida International University, 
Miami, FL.
(12)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Science, Yale School 
of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(13)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
MI.

Mammalian pregnancy evolved in the therian stem lineage, that is, before the 
common ancestor of marsupials and eutherian (placental) mammals. Ancestral 
therian pregnancy likely involved a brief phase of attachment between the fetal 
and maternal tissues followed by parturition-similar to the situation in most 
marsupials including the opossum. In all eutherians, however, embryo attachment 
is followed by implantation, allowing for a stable fetal-maternal interface and 
an extended gestation. Embryo attachment induces an attachment reaction in the 
uterus that is homologous to an inflammatory response. Here, we elucidate the 
evolutionary mechanism by which the ancestral inflammatory response was 
transformed into embryo implantation in the eutherian lineage. We performed a 
comparative uterine transcriptomic and immunohistochemical study of three 
eutherians, armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), hyrax (Procavia capensis), and 
rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus); and one marsupial, opossum (Monodelphis 
domestica). Our results suggest that in the eutherian lineage, the ancestral 
inflammatory response was domesticated by suppressing one of its modules 
detrimental to pregnancy, namely, neutrophil recruitment by cytokine IL17A. 
Further, we propose that this suppression was mediated by decidual stromal 
cells, a novel cell type in eutherian mammals. We tested a prediction of this 
model in vitro and showed that decidual stromal cells can suppress the 
production of IL17A from helper T cells. Together, these results provide a 
mechanistic understanding of early stages in the evolution of eutherian 
pregnancy.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa274
PMCID: PMC7947829
PMID: 33185661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1089. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1090-1100. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa277.

Partitioned Gene-Tree Analyses and Gene-Based Topology Testing Help Resolve 
Incongruence in a Phylogenomic Study of Host-Specialist Bees (Apidae: 
Eucerinae).

Freitas FV(1)(2), Branstetter MG(2), Griswold T(2), Almeida EAB(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Comparada e Abelhas (LBCA), Departamento de Biologia, 
Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciências e Letras, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão 
Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS), 
Pollinating Insects Research Unit, Utah State University, Logan, UT.

Incongruence among phylogenetic results has become a common occurrence in 
analyses of genome-scale data sets. Incongruence originates from uncertainty in 
underlying evolutionary processes (e.g., incomplete lineage sorting) and from 
difficulties in determining the best analytical approaches for each situation. 
To overcome these difficulties, more studies are needed that identify 
incongruences and demonstrate practical ways to confidently resolve them. Here, 
we present results of a phylogenomic study based on the analysis 197 taxa and 
2,526 ultraconserved element (UCE) loci. We investigate evolutionary 
relationships of Eucerinae, a diverse subfamily of apid bees (relatives of honey 
bees and bumble bees) with >1,200 species. We sampled representatives of all 
tribes within the group and >80% of genera, including two mysterious South 
American genera, Chilimalopsis and Teratognatha. Initial analysis of the UCE 
data revealed two conflicting hypotheses for relationships among tribes. To 
resolve the incongruence, we tested concatenation and species tree approaches 
and used a variety of additional strategies including locus filtering, 
partitioned gene-trees searches, and gene-based topological tests. We show that 
within-locus partitioning improves gene tree and subsequent species-tree 
estimation, and that this approach, confidently resolves the incongruence 
observed in our data set. After exploring our proposed analytical strategy on 
eucerine bees, we validated its efficacy to resolve hard phylogenetic problems 
by implementing it on a published UCE data set of Adephaga (Insecta: 
Coleoptera). Our results provide a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for Eucerinae 
and demonstrate a practical strategy for resolving incongruence in other 
phylogenomic data sets.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa277
PMCID: PMC7947843
PMID: 33179746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1090. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1330-1338. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa292.

In Vivo Microbial Coevolution Favors Host Protection and Plastic Downregulation 
of Immunity.

Ford SA(1), King KC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Microbiota can protect their hosts from infection. The short timescales in which 
microbes can evolve presents the possibility that "protective microbes" can 
take-over from the immune system of longer-lived hosts in the coevolutionary 
race against pathogens. Here, we found that coevolution between a protective 
bacterium (Enterococcus faecalis) and a virulent pathogen (Staphylococcus 
aureus) within an animal population (Caenorhabditis elegans) resulted in more 
disease suppression than when the protective bacterium adapted to uninfected 
hosts. At the same time, more protective E. faecalis populations became costlier 
to harbor and altered the expression of 134 host genes. Many of these genes 
appear to be related to the mechanism of protection, reactive oxygen species 
production. Crucially, more protective E. faecalis populations downregulated a 
key immune gene, , known to be effective against S. aureus infection. These 
results suggest that a microbial line of defense is favored by microbial 
coevolution and may cause hosts to plastically divest of their own immunity.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa292
PMCID: PMC8042738
PMID: 33179739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1091. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4149-4165. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa276.

Detecting Genetic Ancestry and Adaptation in the Taiwanese Han People.

Lo YH(1), Cheng HC(1), Hsiung CN(2), Yang SL(2), Wang HY(1), Peng CW(1), Chen 
CY(1), Lin KP(1), Kang ML(1), Chen CH(2), Chu HW(2), Lin CF(3), Lee MH(4), Liu 
Q(5), Satta Y(5), Lin CJ(6), Lin M(6), Chaw SM(7), Loo JH(6), Shen CY(2), Ko 
WY(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(3)Research Team, DNAnexus, Mountain View, CA.
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Evolutionary Studies of Biosystems, SOKENDAI (The Graduate 
University for Advanced Studies), Hayama, Japan.
(6)Molecular Anthropology and Transfusion Medicine Research Laboratory, Mackay 
Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei City, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 21;:

The Taiwanese people are composed of diverse indigenous populations and the 
Taiwanese Han. About 95% of the Taiwanese identify themselves as Taiwanese Han, 
but this may not be a homogeneous population because they migrated to the island 
from various regions of continental East Asia over a period of 400 years. Little 
is known about the underlying patterns of genetic ancestry, population 
admixture, and evolutionary adaptation in the Taiwanese Han people. Here, we 
analyzed the whole-genome single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping data from 
14,401 individuals of Taiwanese Han collected by the Taiwan Biobank and the 
whole-genome sequencing data for a subset of 772 people. We detected four major 
genetic ancestries with distinct geographic distributions (i.e., Northern, 
Southeastern, Japonic, and Island Southeast Asian ancestries) and signatures of 
population mixture contributing to the genomes of Taiwanese Han. We further 
scanned for signatures of positive natural selection that caused unusually 
long-range haplotypes and elevations of hitchhiked variants. As a result, we 
identified 16 candidate loci in which selection signals can be unambiguously 
localized at five single genes: CTNNA2, LRP1B, CSNK1G3, ASTN2, and NEO1. 
Statistical associations were examined in 16 metabolic-related traits to further 
elucidate the functional effects of each candidate gene. All five genes appear 
to have pleiotropic connections to various types of disease susceptibility and 
significant associations with at least one metabolic-related trait. Together, 
our results provide critical insights for understanding the evolutionary history 
and adaption of the Taiwanese Han population.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa276
PMCID: PMC8476137
PMID: 33170928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1092. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 May 4;38(5):1715-1730. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa285.

How to Make a Rodent Giant: Genomic Basis and Tradeoffs of Gigantism in the 
Capybara, the World's Largest Rodent.

Herrera-Álvarez S(1), Karlsson E(2)(3), Ryder OA(4), Lindblad-Toh K(2)(5), 
Crawford AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, 
Colombia.
(2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, MA, USA.
(4)San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research, San Diego Zoo Global, 
Escondido, CA, USA.
(5)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Gigantism results when one lineage within a clade evolves extremely large body 
size relative to its small-bodied ancestors, a common phenomenon in animals. 
Theory predicts that the evolution of giants should be constrained by two 
tradeoffs. First, because body size is negatively correlated with population 
size, purifying selection is expected to be less efficient in species of large 
body size, leading to increased mutational load. Second, gigantism is achieved 
through generating a higher number of cells along with higher rates of cell 
proliferation, thus increasing the likelihood of cancer. To explore the genetic 
basis of gigantism in rodents and uncover genomic signatures of 
gigantism-related tradeoffs, we assembled a draft genome of the capybara 
(Hydrochoerus hydrochaeris), the world's largest living rodent. We found that 
the genome-wide ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutations (ω) is elevated 
in the capybara relative to other rodents, likely caused by a generation-time 
effect and consistent with a nearly neutral model of molecular evolution. A 
genome-wide scan for adaptive protein evolution in the capybara highlighted 
several genes controlling postnatal bone growth regulation and musculoskeletal 
development, which are relevant to anatomical and developmental modifications 
for an increase in overall body size. Capybara-specific gene-family expansions 
included a putative novel anticancer adaptation that involves T-cell-mediated 
tumor suppression, offering a potential resolution to the increased cancer risk 
in this lineage. Our comparative genomic results uncovered the signature of an 
intragenomic conflict where the evolution of gigantism in the capybara involved 
selection on genes and pathways that are directly linked to cancer.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa285
PMCID: PMC8097284
PMID: 33169792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1093. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1614-1626. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa288.

Special Care Is Needed in Applying Phylogenetic Comparative Methods to Gene 
Trees with Speciation and Duplication Nodes.

Begum T(1)(2), Robinson-Rechavi M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

How gene function evolves is a central question of evolutionary biology. It can 
be investigated by comparing functional genomics results between species and 
between genes. Most comparative studies of functional genomics have used 
pairwise comparisons. Yet it has been shown that this can provide biased 
results, as genes, like species, are phylogenetically related. Phylogenetic 
comparative methods should be used to correct for this, but they depend on 
strong assumptions, including unbiased tree estimates relative to the hypothesis 
being tested. Such methods have recently been used to test the "ortholog 
conjecture," the hypothesis that functional evolution is faster in paralogs than 
in orthologs. Although pairwise comparisons of tissue specificity (τ) provided 
support for the ortholog conjecture, phylogenetic independent contrasts did not. 
Our reanalysis on the same gene trees identified problems with the time 
calibration of duplication nodes. We find that the gene trees used suffer from 
important biases, due to the inclusion of trees with no duplication nodes, to 
the relative age of speciations and duplications, to systematic differences in 
branch lengths, and to non-Brownian motion of tissue specificity on many trees. 
We find that incorrect implementation of phylogenetic method in empirical gene 
trees with duplications can be problematic. Controlling for biases allows 
successful use of phylogenetic methods to study the evolution of gene function 
and provides some support for the ortholog conjecture using three different 
phylogenetic approaches.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa288
PMCID: PMC8042747
PMID: 33169790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1094. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1040-1059. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa273.

Heterozygous, Polyploid, Giant Bacterium, Achromatium, Possesses an Identical 
Functional Inventory Worldwide across Drastically Different Ecosystems.

Ionescu D(1)(2), Zoccarato L(1), Zaduryan A(3), Schorn S(4), Bizic M(1)(2), 
Pinnow S(1), Cypionka H(5), Grossart HP(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries, Neuglobsow, 
Germany.
(2)Berlin Brandenburg Institute of Biodiversity, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Microbial Ecology, Centre for Microbiology and Environmental 
Systems Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany.
(5)Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the Marine Environment, Oldenburg, 
Germany.
(6)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, Potsdam University, Potsdam, Germany.

Achromatium is large, hyperpolyploid and the only known heterozygous bacterium. 
Single cells contain approximately 300 different chromosomes with allelic 
diversity far exceeding that typically harbored by single bacteria genera. 
Surveying all publicly available sediment sequence archives, we show that 
Achromatium is common worldwide, spanning temperature, salinity, pH, and depth 
ranges normally resulting in bacterial speciation. Although saline and 
freshwater Achromatium spp. appear phylogenetically separated, the genus 
Achromatium contains a globally identical, complete functional inventory 
regardless of habitat. Achromatium spp. cells from differing ecosystems (e.g., 
from freshwater to saline) are, unexpectedly, equally functionally equipped but 
differ in gene expression patterns by transcribing only relevant genes. We 
suggest that environmental adaptation occurs by increasing the copy number of 
relevant genes across the cell's hundreds of chromosomes, without losing 
irrelevant ones, thus maintaining the ability to survive in any ecosystem type. 
The functional versatility of Achromatium and its genomic features reveal 
alternative genetic and evolutionary mechanisms, expanding our understanding of 
the role and evolution of polyploidy in bacteria while challenging the bacterial 
species concept and drivers of bacterial speciation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa273
PMCID: PMC7947748
PMID: 33169788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1095. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1241-1248. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa281.

Characterizing Transcriptional Regulatory Sequences in Coronaviruses and Their 
Role in Recombination.

Yang Y(1), Yan W(1), Hall AB(2)(3), Jiang X(1).

Author information:
(1)National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland, 
College Park, MD.
(3)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Maryland, 
College Park, MD.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2020 Jun 21;:

Novel coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-2, SARS, and MERS, often originate from 
recombination events. The mechanism of recombination in RNA viruses is template 
switching. Coronavirus transcription also involves template switching at 
specific regions, called transcriptional regulatory sequences (TRS). It is 
hypothesized but not yet verified that TRS sites are prone to recombination 
events. Here, we developed a tool called SuPER to systematically identify TRS in 
coronavirus genomes and then investigated whether recombination is more common 
at TRS. We ran SuPER on 506 coronavirus genomes and identified 465 TRS-L and 
3,509 TRS-B. We found that the TRS-L core sequence (CS) and the secondary 
structure of the leader sequence are generally conserved within coronavirus 
genera but different between genera. By examining the location of recombination 
breakpoints with respect to TRS-B CS, we observed that recombination hotspots 
are more frequently colocated with TRS-B sites than expected.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa281
PMCID: PMC7665640
PMID: 33146390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1096. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Apr 13;38(4):1317-1329. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa290.

Genomic Architecture of Rapid Parallel Adaptation to Fresh Water in a Wild Fish.

Zong SB(1)(2), Li YL(1)(3)(4), Liu JX(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Marine Ecology and Environmental Sciences, Institute of 
Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Laboratory for Marine Ecology and Environmental Science, Qingdao National 
Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China.
(4)Center for Ocean Mega-Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China.

Rapid adaptation to novel environments may drive changes in genomic regions 
through natural selection. However, the genetic architecture underlying these 
adaptive changes is still poorly understood. Using population genomic 
approaches, we investigated the genomic architecture that underlies rapid 
parallel adaptation of Coilia nasus to fresh water by comparing four 
freshwater-resident populations with their ancestral anadromous population. 
Linkage disequilibrium network analysis and population genetic analyses revealed 
two putative large chromosome inversions on LG6 and LG22, which were enriched 
for outlier loci and exhibited parallel association with freshwater adaptation. 
Drastic frequency shifts and elevated genetic differentiation were observed for 
the two chromosome inversions among populations, suggesting that both inversions 
would undergo divergent selection between anadromous and resident ecotypes. 
Enrichment analysis of genes within chromosome inversions showed significant 
enrichment of genes involved in metabolic process, immunoregulation, growth, 
maturation, osmoregulation, and so forth, which probably underlay differences in 
morphology, physiology and behavior between the anadromous and 
freshwater-resident forms. The availability of beneficial standing genetic 
variation, large optimum shift between marine and freshwater habitats, and high 
efficiency of selection with large population size could lead to the observed 
rapid parallel adaptive genomic change. We propose that chromosomal inversions 
might have played an important role during the evolution of rapid parallel 
ecological divergence in the face of environmental heterogeneity in C. nasus. 
Our study provides insights into the genomic basis of rapid adaptation of 
complex traits in novel habitats and highlights the importance of structural 
genomic variants in analyses of ecological adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa290
PMCID: PMC8480189
PMID: 33146383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1097. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1101-1121. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa278.

Common Adaptive Strategies Underlie Within-Host Evolution of Bacterial 
Pathogens.

Gatt YE(1), Margalit H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute for Medical 
Research Israel-Canada, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, Israel.

Within-host adaptation is a hallmark of chronic bacterial infections, involving 
substantial genomic changes. Recent large-scale genomic data from prolonged 
infections allow the examination of adaptive strategies employed by different 
pathogens and open the door to investigate whether they converge toward similar 
strategies. Here, we compiled extensive data of whole-genome sequences of 
bacterial isolates belonging to miscellaneous species sampled at sequential time 
points during clinical infections. Analysis of these data revealed that 
different species share some common adaptive strategies, achieved by mutating 
various genes. Although the same genes were often mutated in several strains 
within a species, different genes related to the same pathway, structure, or 
function were changed in other species utilizing the same adaptive strategy 
(e.g., mutating flagellar genes). Strategies exploited by various bacterial 
species were often predicted to be driven by the host immune system, a powerful 
selective pressure that is not species specific. Remarkably, we find adaptive 
strategies identified previously within single species to be ubiquitous. Two 
striking examples are shifts from siderophore-based to heme-based iron 
scavenging (previously shown for Pseudomonas aeruginosa) and changes in 
glycerol-phosphate metabolism (previously shown to decrease sensitivity to 
antibiotics in Mycobacterium tuberculosis). Virulence factors were often 
adaptively affected in different species, indicating shifts from acute to 
chronic virulence and virulence attenuation during infection. Our study presents 
a global view on common within-host adaptive strategies employed by different 
bacterial species and provides a rich resource for further studying these 
processes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa278
PMCID: PMC7947768
PMID: 33118035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1098. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1075-1089. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa275.

Group II Introns Generate Functional Chimeric Relaxase Enzymes with Modified 
Specificities through Exon Shuffling at Both the RNA and DNA Level.

LaRoche-Johnston F(1), Bosan R(1), Cousineau B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montréal, 
Québec, Canada.

Group II introns are large self-splicing RNA enzymes with a broad but somewhat 
irregular phylogenetic distribution. These ancient retromobile elements are the 
proposed ancestors of approximately half the human genome, including the 
abundant spliceosomal introns and non-long terminal repeat retrotransposons. In 
contrast to their eukaryotic derivatives, bacterial group II introns have 
largely been considered as harmful selfish mobile retroelements that parasitize 
the genome of their host. As a challenge to this view, we recently uncovered a 
new intergenic trans-splicing pathway that generates an assortment of mRNA 
chimeras. The ability of group II introns to combine disparate mRNA fragments 
was proposed to increase the genetic diversity of the bacterial host by 
shuffling coding sequences. Here, we show that the Ll.LtrB and Ef.PcfG group II 
introns from Lactococcus lactis and Enterococcus faecalis respectively can both 
use the intergenic trans-splicing pathway to catalyze the formation of chimeric 
relaxase mRNAs and functional proteins. We demonstrated that some of these 
compound relaxase enzymes yield gain-of-function phenotypes, being significantly 
more efficient than their precursor wild-type enzymes at supporting bacterial 
conjugation. We also found that relaxase enzymes with shuffled functional 
domains are produced in biologically relevant settings under natural expression 
levels. Finally, we uncovered examples of lactococcal chimeric relaxase genes 
with junctions exactly at the intron insertion site. Overall, our work 
demonstrates that the genetic diversity generated by group II introns, at the 
RNA level by intergenic trans-splicing and at the DNA level by recombination, 
can yield new functional enzymes with shuffled exons, which can lead to 
gain-of-function phenotypes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa275
PMCID: PMC7947834
PMID: 33118013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1099. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1006-1017. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa270.

CCA-Addition Gone Wild: Unusual Occurrence and Phylogeny of Four Different tRNA 
Nucleotidyltransferases in Acanthamoeba castellanii.

Erber L(1), Betat H(1), Mörl M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany.

tRNAs are important players in the protein synthesis machinery, where they act 
as adapter molecules for translating the mRNA codons into the corresponding 
amino acid sequence. In a series of highly conserved maturation steps, the 
primary transcripts are converted into mature tRNAs. In the amoebozoan 
Acanthamoeba castellanii, a highly unusual evolution of some of these processing 
steps was identified that are based on unconventional RNA polymerase activities. 
In this context, we investigated the synthesis of the 3'-terminal CCA-end that 
is added posttranscriptionally by a specialized polymerase, the tRNA 
nucleotidyltransferase (CCA-adding enzyme). The majority of eukaryotic organisms 
carry only a single gene for a CCA-adding enzyme that acts on both the cytosolic 
and the mitochondrial tRNA pool. In a bioinformatic analysis of the genome of 
this organism, we identified a surprising multitude of genes for enzymes that 
contain the active site signature of eukaryotic/eubacterial tRNA 
nucleotidyltransferases. In vitro activity analyses of these enzymes revealed 
that two proteins represent bona fide CCA-adding enzymes, one of them carrying 
an N-terminal sequence corresponding to a putative mitochondrial target signal. 
The other enzymes have restricted activities and represent CC- and A-adding 
enzymes, respectively. The A-adding enzyme is of particular interest, as its 
sequence is closely related to corresponding enzymes from Proteobacteria, 
indicating a horizontal gene transfer. Interestingly, this unusual diversity of 
nucleotidyltransferase genes is not restricted to Acanthamoeba castellanii but 
is also present in other members of the Acanthamoeba genus, indicating an 
ancient evolutionary trait.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa270
PMCID: PMC7947759
PMID: 33095240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1100. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1018-1030. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa271.

Widespread Recombination Suppression Facilitates Plant Sex Chromosome Evolution.

Rifkin JL(1), Beaudry FEG(1), Humphries Z(1), Choudhury BI(1), Barrett SCH(1), 
Wright SI(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Centre for Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

Classical models suggest that recombination rates on sex chromosomes evolve in a 
stepwise manner to localize sexually antagonistic variants in the sex in which 
they are beneficial, thereby lowering rates of recombination between X and Y 
chromosomes. However, it is also possible that sex chromosome formation occurs 
in regions with preexisting recombination suppression. To evaluate these 
possibilities, we constructed linkage maps and a chromosome-scale genome 
assembly for the dioecious plant Rumex hastatulus. This species has a 
polymorphic karyotype with a young neo-sex chromosome, resulting from a 
Robertsonian fusion between the X chromosome and an autosome, in part of its 
geographic range. We identified the shared and neo-sex chromosomes using 
comparative genetic maps of the two cytotypes. We found that sex-linked regions 
of both the ancestral and the neo-sex chromosomes are embedded in large regions 
of low recombination. Furthermore, our comparison of the recombination landscape 
of the neo-sex chromosome to its autosomal homolog indicates that low 
recombination rates mainly preceded sex linkage. These patterns are not unique 
to the sex chromosomes; all chromosomes were characterized by massive regions of 
suppressed recombination spanning most of each chromosome. This represents an 
extreme case of the periphery-biased recombination seen in other systems with 
large chromosomes. Across all chromosomes, gene and repetitive sequence density 
correlated with recombination rate, with patterns of variation differing by 
repetitive element type. Our findings suggest that ancestrally low rates of 
recombination may facilitate the formation and subsequent evolution of 
heteromorphic sex chromosomes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa271
PMCID: PMC7947811
PMID: 33095227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1101. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1184-1198. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa263.

Contrast-FEL-A Test for Differences in Selective Pressures at Individual Sites 
among Clades and Sets of Branches.

Kosakovsky Pond SL(1), Wisotsky SR(1), Escalante A(1), Magalis BR(1)(2), Weaver 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.

A number of evolutionary hypotheses can be tested by comparing selective 
pressures among sets of branches in a phylogenetic tree. When the question of 
interest is to identify specific sites within genes that may be evolving 
differently, a common approach is to perform separate analyses on subsets of 
sequences and compare parameter estimates in a post hoc fashion. This approach 
is statistically suboptimal and not always applicable. Here, we develop a simple 
extension of a popular fixed effects likelihood method in the context of 
codon-based evolutionary phylogenetic maximum likelihood testing, Contrast-FEL. 
It is suitable for identifying individual alignment sites where any among the 
K≥2 sets of branches in a phylogenetic tree have detectably different ω ratios, 
indicative of different selective regimes. Using extensive simulations, we show 
that Contrast-FEL delivers good power, exceeding 90% for sufficiently large 
differences, while maintaining tight control over false positive rates, when the 
model is correctly specified. We conclude by applying Contrast-FEL to data from 
five previously published studies spanning a diverse range of organisms and 
focusing on different evolutionary questions.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa263
PMCID: PMC7947784
PMID: 33064823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1102. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1000-1005. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa268.

Mutation Rate Variability across Human Y-Chromosome Haplogroups.

Ding Q(1), Hu Y(1)(2), Koren A(1), Clark AG(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
(2)New York Genome Center, New York, NY.
(3)Department of Computational Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.

A common assumption in dating patrilineal events using Y-chromosome sequencing 
data is that the Y-chromosome mutation rate is invariant across haplogroups. 
Previous studies revealed interhaplogroup heterogeneity in phylogenetic branch 
length. Whether this heterogeneity is caused by interhaplogroup mutation rate 
variation or nongenetic confounders remains unknown. Here, we analyzed 
whole-genome sequences from cultured cells derived from >1,700 males. We 
confirmed the presence of branch length heterogeneity. We demonstrate that 
sex-chromosome mutations that appear within cell lines, which likely occurred 
somatically or in vitro (and are thus not influenced by nongenetic confounders) 
are informative for germline mutational processes. Using within-cell-line 
mutations, we computed a relative Y-chromosome somatic mutation rate, and 
uncovered substantial variation (up to 83.3%) in this proxy for germline 
mutation rate among haplogroups. This rate positively correlates with 
phylogenetic branch length, indicating that interhaplogroup mutation rate 
variation is a likely cause of branch length heterogeneity.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa268
PMCID: PMC7947773
PMID: 33049047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1103. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1199-1208. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa265.

A Bayesian Mutation-Selection Framework for Detecting Site-Specific Adaptive 
Evolution in Protein-Coding Genes.

Rodrigue N(1), Latrille T(2), Lartillot N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, and School of Mathematics 
and Statistics, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada.
(2)Université de Lyon, Université Lyon 1, CNRS; UMR 5558, Laboratoire de 
Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive, Villeurbanne, F-69622, France.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3032.

In recent years, codon substitution models based on the mutation-selection 
principle have been extended for the purpose of detecting signatures of adaptive 
evolution in protein-coding genes. However, the approaches used to date have 
either focused on detecting global signals of adaptive regimes-across the entire 
gene-or on contexts where experimentally derived, site-specific amino acid 
fitness profiles are available. Here, we present a Bayesian site-heterogeneous 
mutation-selection framework for site-specific detection of adaptive 
substitution regimes given a protein-coding DNA alignment. We offer 
implementations, briefly present simulation results, and apply the approach on a 
few real data sets. Our analyses suggest that the new approach shows greater 
sensitivity than traditional methods. However, more study is required to assess 
the impact of potential model violations on the method, and gain a greater 
empirical sense its behavior on a broader range of real data sets. We propose an 
outline of such a research program.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa265
PMCID: PMC7947879
PMID: 33045094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1104. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1209-1224. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa267.

Learning Retention Mechanisms and Evolutionary Parameters of Duplicate Genes 
from Their Expression Data.

DeGiorgio M(1)(2), Assis R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431.
(2)Institute for Human Health and Disease Intervention, Florida Atlantic 
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431.

Learning about the roles that duplicate genes play in the origins of novel 
phenotypes requires an understanding of how their functions evolve. A previous 
method for achieving this goal, CDROM, employs gene expression distances as 
proxies for functional divergence and then classifies the evolutionary 
mechanisms retaining duplicate genes from comparisons of these distances in a 
decision tree framework. However, CDROM does not account for stochastic shifts 
in gene expression or leverage advances in contemporary statistical learning for 
performing classification, nor is it capable of predicting the parameters 
driving duplicate gene evolution. Thus, here we develop CLOUD, a multi-layer 
neural network built on a model of gene expression evolution that can both 
classify duplicate gene retention mechanisms and predict their underlying 
evolutionary parameters. We show that not only is the CLOUD classifier 
substantially more powerful and accurate than CDROM, but that it also yields 
accurate parameter predictions, enabling a better understanding of the specific 
forces driving the evolution and long-term retention of duplicate genes. 
Further, application of the CLOUD classifier and predictor to empirical data 
from Drosophila recapitulates many previous findings about gene duplication in 
this lineage, showing that new functions often emerge rapidly and asymmetrically 
in younger duplicate gene copies, and that functional divergence is driven by 
strong natural selection. Hence, CLOUD represents a major advancement in 
classifying retention mechanisms and predicting evolutionary parameters of 
duplicate genes, thereby highlighting the utility of incorporating sophisticated 
statistical learning techniques to address long-standing questions about 
evolution after gene duplication.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa267
PMCID: PMC7947822
PMID: 33045078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1105. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):745-760. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa266.

Genomic Adaptations to Salinity Resist Gene Flow in the Evolution of Floridian 
Watersnakes.

Rautsaw RM(1)(2), Schramer TD(1), Acuña R(2), Arick LN(2), DiMeo M(1)(2), 
Mercier KP(1)(2)(3)(4), Schrum M(2), Mason AJ(1)(2), Margres MJ(1)(5)(6), 
Strickland JL(1)(2)(7), Parkinson CL(1)(2)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL.
(3)Department of Biology, City College of New York, New York, NY.
(4)PhD Program in Biology, The Graduate Center of the City University of New 
York, New York, NY.
(5)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
(6)Department of Integrative Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL.
(7)Department of Biology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL.
(8)Department of Forestry and Environmental Conservation, Clemson University, 
Clemson, SC.

The migration-selection balance often governs the evolution of lineages, and 
speciation with gene flow is now considered common across the tree of life. 
Ecological speciation is a process that can facilitate divergence despite gene 
flow due to strong selective pressures caused by ecological differences; 
however, the exact traits under selection are often unknown. The transition from 
freshwater to saltwater habitats provides strong selection targeting traits with 
osmoregulatory function. Several lineages of North American watersnakes (Nerodia 
spp.) are known to occur in saltwater habitat and represent a useful system for 
studying speciation by providing an opportunity to investigate gene flow and 
evaluate how species boundaries are maintained or degraded. We use double digest 
restriction-site associated DNA sequencing to characterize the 
migration-selection balance and test for evidence of ecological divergence 
within the Nerodia fasciata-clarkii complex in Florida. We find evidence of high 
intraspecific gene flow with a pattern of isolation-by-distance underlying 
subspecific lineages. However, we identify genetic structure indicative of 
reduced gene flow between inland and coastal lineages suggesting divergence due 
to isolation-by-environment. This pattern is consistent with observed 
environmental differences where the amount of admixture decreases with increased 
salinity. Furthermore, we identify significantly enriched terms related to 
osmoregulatory function among a set of candidate loci, including several genes 
that have been previously implicated in adaptation to salinity stress. 
Collectively, our results demonstrate that ecological differences, likely driven 
by salinity, cause strong divergent selection which promotes divergence in the 
N. fasciata-clarkii complex despite significant gene flow.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa266
PMCID: PMC7947766
PMID: 33035326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1106. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):84-95. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa189.

Ancient DNA Suggests Single Colonization and Within-Archipelago Diversification 
of Caribbean Caviomorph Rodents.

Woods R(1)(2), Barnes I(2), Brace S(2), Turvey ST(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, Egham, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Earth Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London, London, United Kingdom.

Reconstructing the evolutionary history of island biotas is complicated by 
unusual morphological evolution in insular environments. However, past 
human-caused extinctions limit the use of molecular analyses to determine 
origins and affinities of enigmatic island taxa. The Caribbean formerly 
contained a morphologically diverse assemblage of caviomorph rodents (33 species 
in 19 genera), ranging from ∼0.1 to 200 kg and traditionally classified into 
three higher-order taxa (Capromyidae/Capromyinae, Heteropsomyinae, and 
Heptaxodontidae). Few species survive today, and the evolutionary affinities of 
living and extinct Caribbean caviomorphs to each other and to mainland taxa are 
unclear: Are they monophyletic, polyphyletic, or paraphyletic? We use ancient 
DNA techniques to present the first genetic data for extinct heteropsomyines and 
heptaxodontids, as well as for several extinct capromyids, and demonstrate 
through analysis of mitogenomic and nuclear data sets that all sampled Caribbean 
caviomorphs represent a well-supported monophyletic group. The remarkable 
morphological and ecological variation observed across living and extinct 
caviomorphs from Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, and other islands was 
generated through within-archipelago evolutionary radiation following a single 
Early Miocene overwater colonization. This evolutionary pattern contrasts with 
the origination of diversity in many other Caribbean groups. All living and 
extinct Caribbean caviomorphs comprise a single biologically remarkable 
subfamily (Capromyinae) within the morphologically conservative living 
Neotropical family Echimyidae. Caribbean caviomorphs represent an important new 
example of insular mammalian adaptive radiation, where taxa retaining 
"ancestral-type" characteristics coexisted alongside taxa occupying novel island 
niches. Diversification was associated with the greatest insular body mass 
increase recorded in rodents and possibly the greatest for any mammal lineage.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa189
PMCID: PMC7783164
PMID: 33035304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1107. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):986-999. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa264.

Differences in Postmating Transcriptional Responses between Conspecific and 
Heterospecific Matings in Drosophila.

Ahmed-Braimah YH(1)(2), Wolfner MF(1), Clark AG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 
13850.
(2)Department of Biology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244.

In many animal species, females undergo physiological and behavioral changes 
after mating. Some of these changes are driven by male-derived seminal fluid 
proteins and are critical for fertilization success. Unfortunately, our 
understanding of the molecular interplay between female and male reproductive 
proteins remains inadequate. Here, we analyze the postmating response in a 
Drosophila species that has evolved strong gametic incompatibility with its 
sister species; Drosophila novamexicana females produce only ∼1% fertilized eggs 
in crosses with Drosophila americana males, compared to ∼98% produced in 
within-species crosses. This incompatibility is likely caused by mismatched male 
and female reproductive molecules. In this study, we use short-read RNA 
sequencing to examine the evolutionary dynamics of female reproductive genes and 
the postmating transcriptome response in crosses within and between species. 
First, we found that most female reproductive tract genes are slow-evolving 
compared to the genome average. Second, postmating responses in con- and 
heterospecific matings are largely congruent, but heterospecific matings induce 
expression of additional stress-response genes. Some of those are immunity genes 
that are activated by the Imd pathway. We also identify several genes in the 
JAK/STAT signaling pathway that are induced in heterospecific, but not 
conspecific mating. While this immune response was most pronounced in the female 
reproductive tract, we also detect it in the female head and ovaries. These 
results show that the female's postmating transcriptome-level response is 
determined in part by the genotype of the male, and that divergence in male 
reproductive genes and/or traits can have immunogenic effects on females.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa264
PMCID: PMC7947788
PMID: 33035303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1108. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):952-967. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa260.

Concerning P450 Evolution: Structural Analyses Support Bacterial Origin of 
Sterol 14α-Demethylases.

Lamb DC(1), Hargrove TY(2), Zhao B(2), Wawrzak Z(3), Goldstone JV(4), Nes WD(5), 
Kelly SL(1), Waterman MR(2), Stegeman JJ(4), Lepesheva GI(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Science, Swansea University Medical School, Swansea, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, TN.
(3)Synchrotron Research Center, Life Science Collaborative Access Team, 
Northwestern University, Argonne, IL.
(4)Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA.
(5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX.
(6)Center for Structural Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN.

Sterol biosynthesis, primarily associated with eukaryotic kingdoms of life, 
occurs as an abbreviated pathway in the bacterium Methylococcus capsulatus. 
Sterol 14α-demethylation is an essential step in this pathway and is catalyzed 
by cytochrome P450 51 (CYP51). In M. capsulatus, the enzyme consists of the P450 
domain naturally fused to a ferredoxin domain at the C-terminus (CYP51fx). The 
structure of M. capsulatus CYP51fx was solved to 2.7 Å resolution and is the 
first structure of a bacterial sterol biosynthetic enzyme. The structure 
contained one P450 molecule per asymmetric unit with no electron density seen 
for ferredoxin. We connect this with the requirement of P450 substrate binding 
in order to activate productive ferredoxin binding. Further, the structure of 
the P450 domain with bound detergent (which replaced the substrate upon 
crystallization) was solved to 2.4 Å resolution. Comparison of these two 
structures to the CYP51s from human, fungi, and protozoa reveals strict 
conservation of the overall protein architecture. However, the structure of an 
"orphan" P450 from nonsterol-producing Mycobacterium tuberculosis that also has 
CYP51 activity reveals marked differences, suggesting that loss of function in 
vivo might have led to alterations in the structural constraints. Our results 
are consistent with the idea that eukaryotic and bacterial CYP51s evolved from a 
common cenancestor and that early eukaryotes may have recruited CYP51 from a 
bacterial source. The idea is supported by bioinformatic analysis, revealing the 
presence of CYP51 genes in >1,000 bacteria from nine different phyla, >50 of 
them being natural CYP51fx fusion proteins.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa260
PMCID: PMC7947880
PMID: 33031537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1109. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):981-985. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa262.

Mitogenomes Reveal Alternative Initiation Codons and Lineage-Specific Gene Order 
Conservation in Echinoderms.

Quek ZBR(1), Chang JJM(1), Ip YCA(1), Chan YKS(1), Huang D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Tropical Marine Science Institute, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.

The mitochondrial genetic code is much more varied than the standard genetic 
code. The invertebrate mitochondrial code, for instance, comprises six 
initiation codons, including five alternative start codons. However, only two 
initiation codons are known in the echinoderm and flatworm mitochondrial code, 
the canonical ATG and alternative GTG. Here, we analyzed 23 Asteroidea 
mitogenomes, including ten newly sequenced species and unambiguously identified 
at least two other start codons, ATT and ATC, both of which also initiate 
translation of mitochondrial genes in other invertebrates. These findings 
underscore the diversity of the genetic code and expand upon the suite of 
initiation codons among echinoderms to avoid erroneous annotations. Our analyses 
have also uncovered the remarkable conservation of gene order among asteroids, 
echinoids, and holothuroids, with only an interchange between two gene positions 
in asteroids over ∼500 Ma of echinoderm evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa262
PMCID: PMC7947835
PMID: 33027524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1110. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):968-980. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa261.

A General Model to Explain Repeated Turnovers of Sex Determination in the 
Salicaceae.

Yang W(1), Wang D(1), Li Y(1), Zhang Z(1), Tong S(1), Li M(1), Zhang X(2), Zhang 
L(1), Ren L(1), Ma X(1), Zhou R(3), Sanderson BJ(3)(4), Keefover-Ring K(5), Yin 
T(6), Smart LB(7), Liu J(1)(2), DiFazio SP(3), Olson M(4), Ma T(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Grassland Agro-Ecosystem, Institute of Innovation 
Ecology and College of Life Sciences, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(3)Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX.
(5)Departments of Botany and Geography, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI.
(6)The Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Biotechnology of Jiangsu Province and 
Education Department of China, Nanjing Forestry University, Nanjing, China.
(7)Horticulture Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell 
University, New York State Agricultural Experiment Station, Geneva, NY.

Dioecy, the presence of separate sexes on distinct individuals, has evolved 
repeatedly in multiple plant lineages. However, the specific mechanisms by which 
sex systems evolve and their commonalities among plant species remain poorly 
understood. With both XY and ZW sex systems, the family Salicaceae provides a 
system to uncover the evolutionary forces driving sex chromosome turnovers. In 
this study, we performed a genome-wide association study to characterize sex 
determination in two Populus species, P. euphratica and P. alba. Our results 
reveal an XY system of sex determination on chromosome 14 of P. euphratica, and 
a ZW system on chromosome 19 of P. alba. We further assembled the corresponding 
sex-determination regions, and found that their sex chromosome turnovers may be 
driven by the repeated translocations of a Helitron-like transposon. During the 
translocation, this factor may have captured partial or intact sequences that 
are orthologous to a type-A cytokinin response regulator gene. Based on results 
from this and other recently published studies, we hypothesize that this gene 
may act as a master regulator of sex determination for the entire family. We 
propose a general model to explain how the XY and ZW sex systems in this family 
can be determined by the same RR gene. Our study provides new insights into the 
diversification of incipient sex chromosomes in flowering plants by showing how 
transposition and rearrangement of a single gene can control sex in both XY and 
ZW systems.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa261
PMCID: PMC7947767
PMID: 33027519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1111. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):927-939. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa256.

Long-Term m5C Methylome Dynamics Parallel Phenotypic Adaptation in the 
Cyanobacterium Trichodesmium.

Walworth NG(1), Lee MD(2)(3), Dolzhenko E(1), Fu FX(1), Smith AD(1), Webb EA(1), 
Hutchins DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Exobiology Branch, NASA Ames Research Center, Mountain View, CA, USA.
(3)Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle, WA, 98154, USA.

A major challenge in modern biology is understanding how the effects of 
short-term biological responses influence long-term evolutionary adaptation, 
defined as a genetically determined increase in fitness to novel environments. 
This is particularly important in globally important microbes experiencing rapid 
global change, due to their influence on food webs, biogeochemical cycles, and 
climate. Epigenetic modifications like methylation have been demonstrated to 
influence short-term plastic responses, which ultimately impact long-term 
adaptive responses to environmental change. However, there remains a paucity of 
empirical research examining long-term methylation dynamics during environmental 
adaptation in nonmodel, ecologically important microbes. Here, we show the first 
empirical evidence in a marine prokaryote for long-term m5C methylome 
modifications correlated with phenotypic adaptation to CO2, using a 7-year 
evolution experiment (1,000+ generations) with the biogeochemically important 
marine cyanobacterium Trichodesmium. We identify m5C methylated sites that 
rapidly changed in response to high (750 µatm) CO2 exposure and were maintained 
for at least 4.5 years of CO2 selection. After 7 years of CO2 selection, 
however, m5C methylation levels that initially responded to high-CO2 returned to 
ancestral, ambient CO2 levels. Concurrently, high-CO2 adapted growth and N2 
fixation rates remained significantly higher than those of ambient CO2 adapted 
cell lines irrespective of CO2 concentration, a trend consistent with genetic 
assimilation theory. These data demonstrate the maintenance of CO2-responsive 
m5C methylation for 4.5 years alongside phenotypic adaptation before returning 
to ancestral methylation levels. These observations in a globally distributed 
marine prokaryote provide critical evolutionary insights into biogeochemically 
important traits under global change.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa256
PMCID: PMC7947765
PMID: 33022053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1112. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1168-1183. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa259.

Discovery of Ongoing Selective Sweeps within Anopheles Mosquito Populations 
Using Deep Learning.

Xue AT(1), Schrider DR(2), Kern AD(3); Ag1000g Consortium.

Collaborators: Della Torre A, Kern A, Caputo B, Kabula B, White B, Godfray C, 
Edi C, Wilding C, Neafsey D, Schrider D, Conway D, Weetman D, Ayala D, 
Kwiatkowski D, Sharakhov I, Midega J, Xu JJ, Pinto J, Essandoh J, Matowo J, 
Vernick K, Djogbenou LS, Coulibaly M, Lawniczak M, Donnelly M, Hahn M, Fontaine 
M, Riehle M, Besansky N, Cornejo O, McCann R, O'Loughlin S, Robert V, Xue A, 
Miles A, Clarkson C, Battey CJ, Champion C, Labbe F, Bottà G, Adrion J, Nelson 
J, Harding N, Wang R, Small ST, Redmond S, Antão T.

Author information:
(1)Simons Center for Quantitative Biology, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold 
Spring Harbor, NY.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(3)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, 5289 University of Oregon, Eugene, OR.

Identification of partial sweeps, which include both hard and soft sweeps that 
have not currently reached fixation, provides crucial information about ongoing 
evolutionary responses. To this end, we introduce partialS/HIC, a deep learning 
method to discover selective sweeps from population genomic data. partialS/HIC 
uses a convolutional neural network for image processing, which is trained with 
a large suite of summary statistics derived from coalescent simulations 
incorporating population-specific history, to distinguish between completed 
versus partial sweeps, hard versus soft sweeps, and regions directly affected by 
selection versus those merely linked to nearby selective sweeps. We perform 
several simulation experiments under various demographic scenarios to 
demonstrate partialS/HIC's performance, which exhibits excellent resolution for 
detecting partial sweeps. We also apply our classifier to whole genomes from 
eight mosquito populations sampled across sub-Saharan Africa by the Anopheles 
gambiae 1000 Genomes Consortium, elucidating both continent-wide patterns as 
well as sweeps unique to specific geographic regions. These populations have 
experienced intense insecticide exposure over the past two decades, and we 
observe a strong overrepresentation of sweeps at insecticide resistance loci. 
Our analysis thus provides a list of candidate adaptive loci that may be 
relevant to mosquito control efforts. More broadly, our supervised machine 
learning approach introduces a method to distinguish between completed and 
partial sweeps, as well as between hard and soft sweeps, under a variety of 
demographic scenarios. As whole-genome data rapidly accumulate for a greater 
diversity of organisms, partialS/HIC addresses an increasing demand for useful 
selection scan tools that can track in-progress evolutionary dynamics.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa259
PMCID: PMC7947845
PMID: 33022051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1113. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):619-633. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa257.

Divergence and Remarkable Diversity of the Y Chromosome in Guppies.

Almeida P(1), Sandkam BA(2), Morris J(1), Darolti I(2), Breden F(3), Mank 
JE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Zoology and Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, 
Canada.

The guppy sex chromosomes show an extraordinary diversity in divergence across 
populations and closely related species. In order to understand the dynamics of 
the guppy Y chromosome, we used linked-read sequencing to assess Y chromosome 
evolution and diversity across upstream and downstream population pairs that 
vary in predator and food abundance in three replicate watersheds. Based on our 
population-specific genome assemblies, we first confirmed and extended earlier 
reports of two strata on the guppy sex chromosomes. Stratum I shows significant 
accumulation of male-specific sequence, consistent with Y divergence, and 
predates the colonization of Trinidad. In contrast, Stratum II shows divergence 
from the X, but no Y-specific sequence, and this divergence is greater in three 
replicate upstream populations compared with their downstream pair. Despite 
longstanding assumptions that sex chromosome recombination suppression is 
achieved through inversions, we find no evidence of inversions associated with 
either Stratum I or Stratum II. Instead, we observe a remarkable diversity in Y 
chromosome haplotypes within each population, even in the ancestral Stratum I. 
This diversity is likely due to gradual mechanisms of recombination suppression, 
which, unlike an inversion, allow for the maintenance of multiple haplotypes. In 
addition, we show that this Y diversity is dominated by low-frequency haplotypes 
segregating in the population, suggesting a link between haplotype diversity and 
female preference for rare Y-linked color variation. Our results reveal the 
complex interplay between recombination suppression and Y chromosome divergence 
at the earliest stages of sex chromosome divergence.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa257
PMCID: PMC7826173
PMID: 33022040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1114. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):940-951. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa258.

Natural Selection on the Phase-Separation Properties of FUS during 160 My of 
Mammalian Evolution.

Dasmeh P(1)(2)(3), Wagner A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA.
(3)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland.

Protein phase separation can help explain the formation of many nonmembranous 
organelles. However, we know little about its ability to change in evolution. 
Here we studied the evolution of the mammalian RNA-binding protein Fused in 
Sarcoma (FUS), a protein whose prion-like domain (PLD) contributes to the 
formation of stress granules through liquid-liquid phase separation. Although 
the PLD evolves three times as rapidly as the remainder of FUS, it harbors 
absolutely conserved tyrosine residues that are crucial for phase separation. 
Ancestral reconstruction shows that the phosphorylation sites within the PLD are 
subject to stabilizing selection. They toggle among a small number of amino acid 
states. One exception to this pattern is primates, where the number of such 
phosphosites has increased through positive selection. In addition, we find 
frequent glutamine to proline changes that help maintain the unstructured state 
of FUS that is necessary for phase separation. Our work provides evidence that 
natural selection has stabilized the liquid forming potential of FUS and 
minimized the propensity of cytotoxic liquid-to-solid phase transitions during 
160 My of mammalian evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa258
PMCID: PMC7947763
PMID: 33022038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1115. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):911-926. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa255.

Genomic Targets of Positive Selection in Giant Mice from Gough Island.

Payseur BA(1), Jing P(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, WI.

A key challenge in understanding how organisms adapt to their environments is to 
identify the mutations and genes that make it possible. By comparing patterns of 
sequence variation to neutral predictions across genomes, the targets of 
positive selection can be located. We applied this logic to house mice that 
invaded Gough Island (GI), an unusual population that shows phenotypic and 
ecological hallmarks of selection. We used massively parallel short-read 
sequencing to survey the genomes of 14 GI mice. We computed a set of summary 
statistics to capture diverse aspects of variation across these genome 
sequences, used approximate Bayesian computation to reconstruct a null 
demographic model, and then applied machine learning to estimate the posterior 
probability of positive selection in each region of the genome. Using a 
conservative threshold, 1,463 5-kb windows show strong evidence for positive 
selection in GI mice but not in a mainland reference population of German mice. 
Disproportionate shares of these selection windows contain genes that harbor 
derived nonsynonymous mutations with large frequency differences. 
Over-represented gene ontologies in selection windows emphasize neurological 
themes. Inspection of genomic regions harboring many selection windows with high 
posterior probabilities pointed to genes with known effects on exploratory 
behavior and body size as potential targets. Some genes in these regions contain 
candidate adaptive variants, including missense mutations and/or putative 
regulatory mutations. Our results provide a genomic portrait of adaptation to 
island conditions and position GI mice as a powerful system for understanding 
the genetic component of natural selection.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa255
PMCID: PMC7947842
PMID: 33022034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1116. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):606-618. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa250.

Gene-Level, but Not Chromosome-Wide, Divergence between a Very Young House Fly 
Proto-Y Chromosome and Its Homologous Proto-X Chromosome.

Son JH(1)(2), Meisel RP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX.
(2)Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public 
Health, New Haven, CT.

X and Y chromosomes are usually derived from a pair of homologous autosomes, 
which then diverge from each other over time. Although Y-specific features have 
been characterized in sex chromosomes of various ages, the earliest stages of Y 
chromosome evolution remain elusive. In particular, we do not know whether early 
stages of Y chromosome evolution consist of changes to individual genes or 
happen via chromosome-scale divergence from the X. To address this question, we 
quantified divergence between young proto-X and proto-Y chromosomes in the house 
fly, Musca domestica. We compared proto-sex chromosome sequence and gene 
expression between genotypic (XY) and sex-reversed (XX) males. We find evidence 
for sequence divergence between genes on the proto-X and proto-Y, including five 
genes with mitochondrial functions. There is also an excess of genes with 
divergent expression between the proto-X and proto-Y, but the number of genes is 
small. This suggests that individual proto-Y genes, but not the entire proto-Y 
chromosome, have diverged from the proto-X. We identified one gene, encoding an 
axonemal dynein assembly factor (which functions in sperm motility), that has 
higher expression in XY males than XX males because of a disproportionate 
contribution of the proto-Y allele to gene expression. The upregulation of the 
proto-Y allele may be favored in males because of this gene's function in 
spermatogenesis. The evolutionary divergence between proto-X and proto-Y copies 
of this gene, as well as the mitochondrial genes, is consistent with selection 
in males affecting the evolution of individual genes during early Y chromosome 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa250
PMCID: PMC7826193
PMID: 32986844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1117. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):589-605. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa249.

Contrasting Gene Decay in Subterranean Vertebrates: Insights from Cavefishes and 
Fossorial Mammals.

Policarpo M(1), Fumey J(1), Lafargeas P(1), Naquin D(2), Thermes C(2), Naville 
M(3), Dechaud C(3), Volff JN(3), Cabau C(4), Klopp C(5), Møller PR(6), 
Bernatchez L(7), García-Machado E(7)(8), Rétaux S(9), Casane D(1)(10).

Author information:
(1)CNRS, IRD, UMR Évolution, Génomes, Comportement et Écologie, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, Institute for Integrative Biology of the 
Cell (I2BC), 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(3)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, CNRS UMR 
5242, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, 
France.
(4)SIGENAE, GenPhySE, INRAE, ENVT, Université de Toulouse, Castanet Tolosan, 
France.
(5)INRAE, SIGENAE, Genotoul Bioinfo, MIAT UR875, Castanet Tolosan, France.
(6)Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen Ø, 
Denmark.
(7)Department of Biology, Institut de Biologie Intégrative et des Systèmes, 
Université Laval, Québec City, QC, Canada.
(8)Centro de Investigaciones Marinas, Universidad de La Habana, La Habana, Cuba.
(9)CNRS, Institut des Neurosciences Paris-Saclay, Université Paris-Saclay, 
Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(10)UFR Sciences du Vivant, Université de Paris, Paris, France.

Evolution sometimes proceeds by loss, especially when structures and genes 
become dispensable after an environmental shift relaxes functional constraints. 
Subterranean vertebrates are outstanding models to analyze this process, and 
gene decay can serve as a readout. We sought to understand some general 
principles on the extent and tempo of the decay of genes involved in vision, 
circadian clock, and pigmentation in cavefishes. The analysis of the genomes of 
two Cuban species belonging to the genus Lucifuga provided evidence for the 
largest loss of eye-specific genes and nonvisual opsin genes reported so far in 
cavefishes. Comparisons with a recently evolved cave population of Astyanax 
mexicanus and three species belonging to the Chinese tetraploid genus 
Sinocyclocheilus revealed the combined effects of the level of eye regression, 
time, and genome ploidy on eye-specific gene pseudogenization. The limited 
extent of gene decay in all these cavefishes and the very small number of 
loss-of-function mutations per pseudogene suggest that their eye degeneration 
may not be very ancient, ranging from early to late Pleistocene. This is in 
sharp contrast with the identification of several vision genes carrying many 
loss-of-function mutations in ancient fossorial mammals, further suggesting that 
blind fishes cannot thrive more than a few million years in cave ecosystems.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa249
PMCID: PMC7826195
PMID: 32986833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1118. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):575-588. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa247.

Biased Mutation and Selection in RNA Viruses.

Kustin T(1), Stern A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Shmunis School of Biomedicine and Cancer Research, Tel Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Edmond J. Safra Center for Bioinformatics, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.

RNA viruses are responsible for some of the worst pandemics known to mankind, 
including outbreaks of Influenza, Ebola, and COVID-19. One major challenge in 
tackling RNA viruses is the fact they are extremely genetically diverse. 
Nevertheless, they share common features that include their dependence on host 
cells for replication, and high mutation rates. We set out to search for shared 
evolutionary characteristics that may aid in gaining a broader understanding of 
RNA virus evolution, and constructed a phylogeny-based data set spanning 
thousands of sequences from diverse single-stranded RNA viruses of animals. 
Strikingly, we found that the vast majority of these viruses have a skewed 
nucleotide composition, manifested as adenine rich (A-rich) coding sequences. In 
order to test whether A-richness is driven by selection or by biased mutation 
processes, we harnessed the effects of incomplete purifying selection at the 
tips of virus phylogenies. Our results revealed consistent mutational biases 
toward U rather than A in genomes of all viruses. In +ssRNA viruses, we found 
that this bias is compensated by selection against U and selection for A, which 
leads to A-rich genomes. In -ssRNA viruses, the genomic mutational bias toward U 
on the negative strand manifests as A-rich coding sequences, on the positive 
strand. We investigated possible reasons for the advantage of A-rich sequences 
including weakened RNA secondary structures, codon usage bias, and selection for 
a particular amino acid composition, and conclude that host immune pressures may 
have led to similar biases in coding sequence composition across very divergent 
RNA viruses.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa247
PMCID: PMC7543401
PMID: 32986832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1119. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):876-890. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa248.

Population Genomics Reveals Incipient Speciation, Introgression, and Adaptation 
in the African Mona Monkey (Cercopithecus mona).

Ayoola AO(1)(2), Zhang BL(1), Meisel RP(3), Nneji LM(1)(4), Shao Y(1), 
Morenikeji OB(5)(6), Adeola AC(1)(4), Ng'ang'a SI(1)(2), Ogunjemite BG(7), 
Okeyoyin AO(8), Roos C(9), Wu DD(1)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(3)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX.
(4)Sino-Africa Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 
Yunnan, China.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, 
Rochester, NY.
(6)Department of Biology, Hamilton College, Clinton, NY.
(7)Department of Ecotourism and Wildlife Management, Federal University of 
Technology, Akure, Nigeria.
(8)National Park Service Headquarters, Federal Capital Territory, Abuja, 
Nigeria.
(9)Gene Bank of Primates and Primate Genetics Laboratory, German Primate Center, 
Leibniz Institute for Primate Research, Göttingen, Germany.
(10)National Resource Center for Non-Human Primates, Kunming Primate Research 
Center, and National Research Facility for Phenotypic & Genetic Analysis of 
Model Animals (Primate Facility), Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(11)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

Guenons (tribe Cercopithecini) are the most widely distributed nonhuman primate 
in the tropical forest belt of Africa and show considerable phenotypic, 
taxonomic, and ecological diversity. However, genomic information for most 
species within this group is still lacking. Here, we present a high-quality de 
novo genome (total 2.90 Gb, contig N50 equal to 22.7 Mb) of the mona monkey 
(Cercopithecus mona), together with genome resequencing data of 13 individuals 
sampled across Nigeria. Our results showed differentiation between populations 
from East and West of the Niger River ∼84 ka and potential ancient introgression 
in the East population from other mona group species. The PTPRK, FRAS1, BNC2, 
and EDN3 genes related to pigmentation displayed signals of introgression in the 
East population. Genomic scans suggest that immunity genes such as AKT3 and IL13 
(possibly involved in simian immunodeficiency virus defense), and G6PD, a gene 
involved in malaria resistance, are under positive natural selection. Our study 
gives insights into differentiation, natural selection, and introgression in 
guenons.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa248
PMCID: PMC7947840
PMID: 32986826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1120. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):891-903. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa251.

Interrogating Genomic-Scale Data to Resolve Recalcitrant Nodes in the Spider 
Tree of Life.

Kulkarni S(1)(2), Kallal RJ(2), Wood H(2), Dimitrov D(3), Giribet G(4), Hormiga 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, The George Washington University, 
Washington, DC.
(2)Department of Entomology, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian 
Institution, Washington, DC.
(3)Department of Natural History, University Museum of Bergen, University of 
Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Museum of Comparative Zoology, Department of Organismic and Evolutionary 
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.

Genome-scale data sets are converging on robust, stable phylogenetic hypotheses 
for many lineages; however, some nodes have shown disagreement across classes of 
data. We use spiders (Araneae) as a system to identify the causes of 
incongruence in phylogenetic signal between three classes of data: exons (as in 
phylotranscriptomics), noncoding regions (included in ultraconserved elements 
[UCE] analyses), and a combination of both (as in UCE analyses). Gene orthologs, 
coded as amino acids and nucleotides (with and without third codon positions), 
were generated by querying published transcriptomes for UCEs, recovering 1,931 
UCE loci (codingUCEs). We expected that congeners represented in the codingUCE 
and UCEs data would form clades in the presence of phylogenetic signal. 
Noncoding regions derived from UCE sequences were recovered to test the 
stability of relationships. Phylogenetic relationships resulting from all 
analyses were largely congruent. All nucleotide data sets from transcriptomes, 
UCEs, or a combination of both recovered similar topologies in contrast with 
results from transcriptomes analyzed as amino acids. Most relationships inferred 
from low-occupancy data sets, containing several hundreds of loci, were 
congruent across Araneae, as opposed to high occupancy data matrices with fewer 
loci, which showed more variation. Furthermore, we found that low-occupancy data 
sets analyzed as nucleotides (as is typical of UCE data sets) can result in more 
congruent relationships than high occupancy data sets analyzed as amino acids 
(as in phylotranscriptomics). Thus, omitting data, through amino acid 
translation or via retention of only high occupancy loci, may have a deleterious 
effect in phylogenetic reconstruction.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa251
PMCID: PMC7947752
PMID: 32986823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1121. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):735-744. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa252.

Ionotropic Receptors as a Driving Force behind Human Synapse Establishment.

Viscardi LH(1), Imparato DO(2), Bortolini MC(1), Dalmolin RJS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Bioinformatics Multidisciplinary Environment-BioME, IMD, Federal University 
of Rio Grande do Norte, Natal, RN, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, CB, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte, 
Natal, RN, Brazil.

The origin of nervous systems is a main theme in biology and its mechanisms are 
largely underlied by synaptic neurotransmission. One problem to explain synapse 
establishment is that synaptic orthologs are present in multiple aneural 
organisms. We questioned how the interactions among these elements evolved and 
to what extent it relates to our understanding of the nervous systems 
complexity. We identified the human neurotransmission gene network based on 
genes present in GABAergic, glutamatergic, serotonergic, dopaminergic, and 
cholinergic systems. The network comprises 321 human genes, 83 of which act 
exclusively in the nervous system. We reconstructed the evolutionary scenario of 
synapse emergence by looking for synaptic orthologs in 476 eukaryotes. The 
Human-Cnidaria common ancestor displayed a massive emergence of neuroexclusive 
genes, mainly ionotropic receptors, which might have been crucial to the 
evolution of synapses. Very few synaptic genes had their origin after the 
Human-Cnidaria common ancestor. We also identified a higher abundance of 
synaptic proteins in vertebrates, which suggests an increase in the synaptic 
network complexity of those organisms.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa252
PMCID: PMC7947827
PMID: 32986821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1122. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):904-910. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa253.

Microchromosomes Exhibit Distinct Features of Vertebrate Chromosome Structure 
and Function with Underappreciated Ramifications for Genome Evolution.

Perry BW(1), Schield DR(1), Adams RH(1), Castoe TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX.

Microchromosomes are common yet poorly understood components of many vertebrate 
genomes. Recent studies have revealed that microchromosomes contain a high 
density of genes and possess other distinct characteristics compared with 
macrochromosomes. Whether distinctive characteristics of microchromosomes extend 
to features of genome structure and organization, however, remains an open 
question. Here, we analyze Hi-C sequencing data from multiple vertebrate 
lineages and show that microchromosomes exhibit consistently high degrees of 
interchromosomal interaction (particularly with other microchromosomes), appear 
to be colocalized to a common central nuclear territory, and are comprised of a 
higher proportion of open chromatin than macrochromosomes. These findings 
highlight an unappreciated level of diversity in vertebrate genome structure and 
function, and raise important questions regarding the evolutionary origins and 
ramifications of microchromosomes and the genes that they house.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa253
PMCID: PMC7947875
PMID: 32986808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1123. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):519-530. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa242.

Sex-Specific Selection Drives the Evolution of Alternative Splicing in Birds.

Rogers TF(1), Palmer DH(1), Wright AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
United Kingdom.

Males and females of the same species share the majority of their genomes, yet 
they are frequently exposed to conflicting selection pressures. Gene regulation 
is widely assumed to resolve these conflicting sex-specific selection pressures, 
and although there has been considerable focus on elucidating the role of gene 
expression level in sex-specific adaptation, other regulatory mechanisms have 
been overlooked. Alternative splicing enables different transcripts to be 
generated from the same gene, meaning that exons which have sex-specific 
beneficial effects can in theory be retained in the gene product, whereas exons 
with detrimental effects can be skipped. However, at present, little is known 
about how sex-specific selection acts on broad patterns of alternative splicing. 
Here, we investigate alternative splicing across males and females of multiple 
bird species. We identify hundreds of genes that have sex-specific patterns of 
splicing and establish that sex differences in splicing are correlated with 
phenotypic sex differences. Additionally, we find that alternatively spliced 
genes have evolved rapidly as a result of sex-specific selection and suggest 
that sex differences in splicing offer another route to sex-specific adaptation 
when gene expression level changes are limited by functional constraints. 
Overall, our results shed light on how a diverse transcriptional framework can 
give rise to the evolution of phenotypic sexual dimorphism.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa242
PMCID: PMC7826194
PMID: 32977339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1124. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):557-574. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa245.

A Truncated Singleton NLR Causes Hybrid Necrosis in Arabidopsis thaliana.

Barragan AC(1), Collenberg M(1), Wang J(2), Lee RRQ(2), Cher WY(2), Rabanal 
FA(1), Ashkenazy H(1), Weigel D(1), Chae E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Developmental 
Biology, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.

Hybrid necrosis in plants arises from conflict between divergent alleles of 
immunity genes contributed by different parents, resulting in autoimmunity. We 
investigate a severe hybrid necrosis case in Arabidopsis thaliana, where the 
hybrid does not develop past the cotyledon stage and dies 3 weeks after sowing. 
Massive transcriptional changes take place in the hybrid, including the 
upregulation of most NLR (nucleotide-binding site leucine-rich repeat) 
disease-resistance genes. This is due to an incompatible interaction between the 
singleton TIR-NLR gene DANGEROUS MIX 10 (DM10), which was recently relocated 
from a larger NLR cluster, and an unlinked locus, DANGEROUS MIX 11 (DM11). There 
are multiple DM10 allelic variants in the global A. thaliana population, several 
of which have premature stop codons. One of these, which has a truncated LRR-PL 
(leucine-rich repeat [LRR]-post-LRR) region, corresponds to the DM10 risk 
allele. The DM10 locus and the adjacent genomic region in the risk allele 
carriers are highly differentiated from those in the nonrisk carriers in the 
global A. thaliana population, suggesting that this allele became geographically 
widespread only relatively recently. The DM11 risk allele is much rarer and 
found only in two accessions from southwestern Spain-a region from which the 
DM10 risk haplotype is absent-indicating that the ranges of DM10 and DM11 risk 
alleles may be nonoverlapping.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa245
PMCID: PMC7826191
PMID: 32966577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1125. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):856-875. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa246.

Chromosome-Scale Genome Assemblies of Aphids Reveal Extensively Rearranged 
Autosomes and Long-Term Conservation of the X Chromosome.

Mathers TC(1), Wouters RHM(1), Mugford ST(1), Swarbreck D(2), van Oosterhout 
C(3), Hogenhout SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Crop Genetics, John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, 
Norwich, United Kingdom.
(2)Earlham Institute, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Environmental Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, United 
Kingdom.

Chromosome rearrangements are arguably the most dramatic type of mutations, 
often leading to rapid evolution and speciation. However, chromosome dynamics 
have only been studied at the sequence level in a small number of model systems. 
In insects, Diptera and Lepidoptera have conserved genome structure at the scale 
of whole chromosomes or chromosome arms. Whether this reflects the diversity of 
insect genome evolution is questionable given that many species exhibit rapid 
karyotype evolution. Here, we investigate chromosome evolution in aphids-an 
important group of hemipteran plant pests-using newly generated chromosome-scale 
genome assemblies of the green peach aphid (Myzus persicae) and the pea aphid 
(Acyrthosiphon pisum), and a previously published assembly of the corn-leaf 
aphid (Rhopalosiphum maidis). We find that aphid autosomes have undergone 
dramatic reorganization over the last 30 My, to the extent that chromosome 
homology cannot be determined between aphids from the tribes Macrosiphini (Myzus 
persicae and Acyrthosiphon pisum) and Aphidini (Rhopalosiphum maidis). In 
contrast, gene content of the aphid sex (X) chromosome remained unchanged 
despite rapid sequence evolution, low gene expression, and high transposable 
element load. To test whether rapid evolution of genome structure is a hallmark 
of Hemiptera, we compared our aphid assemblies with chromosome-scale assemblies 
of two blood-feeding Hemiptera (Rhodnius prolixus and Triatoma rubrofasciata). 
Despite being more diverged, the blood-feeding hemipterans have conserved 
synteny. The exceptional rate of structural evolution of aphid autosomes renders 
them an important emerging model system for studying the role of large-scale 
genome rearrangements in evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa246
PMCID: PMC7947777
PMID: 32966576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1126. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):634-649. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa220.

Origin and Evolution of the Gene Family of Proteinaceous Pheromones, the 
Exocrine Gland-Secreting Peptides, in Rodents.

Niimura Y(1)(2), Tsunoda M(1)(2), Kato S(1), Murata K(1)(2), Yanagawa T(1), 
Suzuki S(1), Touhara K(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural 
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)ERATO Touhara Chemosensory Signal Project, JST, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Institutes for Advanced Study, International Research Center for 
Neurointelligence (WPI-IRCN), The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The exocrine-gland secreting peptide (ESP)gene family encodes proteinaceous 
pheromones that are recognized by the vomeronasal organ in mice. For example, 
ESP1 is a male pheromone secreted in tear fluid that regulates socio-sexual 
behavior, and ESP22 is a juvenile pheromone that suppresses adult sexual 
behavior. The family consists of multiple genes and has been identified only in 
mouse and rat genomes. The coding region of a mouse ESP gene is separated into 
two exons, each encoding signal and mature sequences. Here, we report the origin 
and evolution of the ESP gene family. ESP genes were found only in the Muridea 
and Cricetidae families of rodents, suggesting a recent origin of ESP genes in 
the common ancestor of murids and cricetids. ESP genes show a great diversity in 
number, length, and sequence among different species as well as mouse strains. 
Some ESPs in rats and golden hamsters are expressed in the lacrimal gland and 
the salivary gland. We also found that a mature sequence of an ESP gene showed 
overall sequence similarity to the α-globin gene. The ancestral ESP gene seems 
to be generated by recombination of a retrotransposed α-globin gene with the 
signal-encoding exon of the CRISP2 gene located adjacent to the ESP gene 
cluster. This study provides an intriguing example of molecular tinkering in 
rapidly evolving species-specific proteinaceous pheromone genes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa220
PMCID: PMC7826187
PMID: 32961551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1127. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):531-544. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa243.

Genomic Signatures of Coevolution between Nonmodel Mammals and Parasitic 
Roundworms.

Hu Y(1)(2)(3), Yu L(1)(2), Fan H(1), Huang G(1), Wu Q(1), Nie Y(1)(3), Liu S(1), 
Yan L(1), Wei F(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Antagonistic coevolution between host and parasite drives species evolution. 
However, most of the studies only focus on parasitism adaptation and do not 
explore the coevolution mechanisms from the perspective of both host and 
parasite. Here, through the de novo sequencing and assembly of the genomes of 
giant panda roundworm, red panda roundworm, and lion roundworm parasitic on 
tiger, we investigated the genomic mechanisms of coevolution between nonmodel 
mammals and their parasitic roundworms and those of roundworm parasitism in 
general. The genome-wide phylogeny revealed that these parasitic roundworms have 
not phylogenetically coevolved with their hosts. The CTSZ and prolyl 
4-hydroxylase subunit beta (P4HB) immunoregulatory proteins played a central 
role in protein interaction between mammals and parasitic roundworms. The gene 
tree comparison identified that seven pairs of interactive proteins had 
consistent phylogenetic topology, suggesting their coevolution during 
host-parasite interaction. These coevolutionary proteins were particularly 
relevant to immune response. In addition, we found that the roundworms of both 
pandas exhibited higher proportions of metallopeptidase genes, and some 
positively selected genes were highly related to their larvae's fast 
development. Our findings provide novel insights into the genetic mechanisms of 
coevolution between nonmodel mammals and parasites and offer the valuable 
genomic resources for scientific ascariasis prevention in both pandas.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa243
PMCID: PMC7826172
PMID: 32960966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1128. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):502-518. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa241.

Host-Endosymbiont Genome Integration in a Deep-Sea Chemosymbiotic Clam.

Ip JC(1)(2)(3), Xu T(1)(2)(3), Sun J(3)(4), Li R(5), Chen C(6), Lan Y(3)(4), Han 
Z(7), Zhang H(7), Wei J(8), Wang H(8), Tao J(8), Cai Z(9), Qian PY(3)(4), Qiu 
JW(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China.
(2)HKBU Institute of Research and Continuing Education, Virtual University Park, 
Shenzhen, China.
(3)Hong Kong Branch of the Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong 
Laboratory (Guangzhou), The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong 
Kong, China.
(4)Division of Life Science, Department of Ocean Science, The Hong Kong 
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases and Public Health, Jockey Club College of 
Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.
(6)X-STAR, Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology (JAMSTEC), 
Yokosuka, Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan.
(7)Sanya Institute of Deep-Sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of 
Science, Sanya, Hainan, China.
(8)MLR Key Laboratory of Marine Mineral Resources, Guangzhou Marine Geological 
Survey, China Geological Survey, Guangzhou, China.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Environmental and Biological Analysis, Hong Kong 
Baptist University, Hong Kong, China.

Endosymbiosis with chemosynthetic bacteria has enabled many deep-sea 
invertebrates to thrive at hydrothermal vents and cold seeps, but most previous 
studies on this mutualism have focused on the bacteria only. Vesicomyid clams 
dominate global deep-sea chemosynthesis-based ecosystems. They differ from most 
deep-sea symbiotic animals in passing their symbionts from parent to offspring, 
enabling intricate coevolution between the host and the symbiont. Here, we 
sequenced the genomes of the clam Archivesica marissinica (Bivalvia: 
Vesicomyidae) and its bacterial symbiont to understand the genomic/metabolic 
integration behind this symbiosis. At 1.52 Gb, the clam genome encodes 28 genes 
horizontally transferred from bacteria, a large number of pseudogenes and 
transposable elements whose massive expansion corresponded to the timing of the 
rise and subsequent divergence of symbiont-bearing vesicomyids. The genome 
exhibits gene family expansion in cellular processes that likely facilitate 
chemoautotrophy, including gas delivery to support energy and carbon production, 
metabolite exchange with the symbiont, and regulation of the bacteriocyte 
population. Contraction in cellulase genes is likely adaptive to the shift from 
phytoplankton-derived to bacteria-based food. It also shows contraction in 
bacterial recognition gene families, indicative of suppressed immune response to 
the endosymbiont. The gammaproteobacterium endosymbiont has a reduced genome of 
1.03 Mb but retains complete pathways for sulfur oxidation, carbon fixation, and 
biosynthesis of 20 common amino acids, indicating the host's high dependence on 
the symbiont for nutrition. Overall, the host-symbiont genomes show not only 
tight metabolic complementarity but also distinct signatures of coevolution 
allowing the vesicomyids to thrive in chemosynthesis-based ecosystems.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa241
PMCID: PMC7826175
PMID: 32956455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1129. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):545-556. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa244.

Human SIRT1 Multispecificity Is Modulated by Active-Site Vicinity Substitutions 
during Natural Evolution.

Hendler A(1)(2), Akiva E(3), Sandhu M(4), Goldberg D(1)(2), Arbely E(1)(5), 
Jackson CJ(4), Aharoni A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva, 
Israel.
(2)National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University of 
the Negev, Be'er Sheva, Israel.
(3)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA.
(4)Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University, Acton, ACT, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Be'er Sheva, 
Israel.

Many enzymes that catalyze protein post-translational modifications can 
specifically modify multiple target proteins. However, little is known regarding 
the molecular basis and evolution of multispecificity in these enzymes. Here, we 
used a combined bioinformatics and experimental approaches to investigate the 
evolution of multispecificity in the sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) deacetylase. Guided by 
bioinformatics analysis of SIRT1 orthologs and substrates, we identified and 
examined important amino acid substitutions that have occurred during the 
evolution of sirtuins in Metazoa and Fungi. We found that mutation of human 
SIRT1 at these positions, based on sirtuin orthologs from Fungi, could alter its 
substrate specificity. These substitutions lead to reduced activity toward K382 
acetylated p53 protein, which is only present in Metazoa, without affecting the 
high activity toward the conserved histone substrates. Results from ancestral 
sequence reconstruction are consistent with a model in which ancestral sirtuin 
proteins exhibited multispecificity, suggesting that the multispecificity of 
some metazoan sirtuins, such as hSIRT1, could be a relatively ancient trait.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa244
PMCID: PMC7826192
PMID: 32956445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1130. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):486-501. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa240.

Genus-Wide Characterization of Bumblebee Genomes Provides Insights into Their 
Evolution and Variation in Ecological and Behavioral Traits.

Sun C(1), Huang J(1), Wang Y(2), Zhao X(1), Su L(1), Thomas GWC(3), Zhao M(4), 
Zhang X(5), Jungreis I(6)(7), Kellis M(6)(7), Vicario S(8), Sharakhov IV(9)(10), 
Bondarenko SM(9), Hasselmann M(11), Kim CN(12), Paten B(12), Penso-Dolfin L(13), 
Wang L(14), Chang Y(14), Gao Q(15), Ma L(15), Ma L(16), Zhang Z(16), Zhang H(2), 
Zhang H(17), Ruzzante L(18), Robertson HM(19), Zhu Y(20), Liu Y(1), Yang H(1), 
Ding L(1), Wang Q(1), Ma D(5), Xu W(1), Liang C(21), Itgen MW(22), Mee L(23), 
Cao G(4), Zhang Z(2), Sadd BM(24), Hahn MW(25)(26), Schaack S(27), Barribeau 
SM(23), Williams PH(28), Waterhouse RM(18), Mueller RL(22).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Chongqing University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural 
University, Wuhan, China.
(5)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Haixia Applied Plant Systems Biology, 
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, China.
(6)MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA.
(7)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA.
(8)Institute of Atmospheric Pollution Research-Italian National Research Council 
C/O Department of Physics, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(9)Department of Entomology, Virginia Polytechnic and State University, 
Blacksburg, VA.
(10)Department of Cytology and Genetics, Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian 
Federation.
(11)Department of Livestock Population Genomics, Institute of Animal Science, 
University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.
(12)UC Santa Cruz Genomics Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa 
Cruz, CA.
(13)Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Genomics 
Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen, 
China.
(15)BGI Genomics, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.
(16)China National Center for Bioinformation & Beijing Institute of Genomics, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(17)College of Pharmacy and Life Science, Jiujiang University, Jiujiang, China.
(18)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, and Swiss 
Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(19)Department of Entomology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Champaign, IL.
(20)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Genome Center, and MIND 
Institute, University of California Davis, Davis, CA.
(21)Institute of Sericultural and Apiculture, Yunnan Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Mengzi, China.
(22)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO.
(23)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behaviour, Institute of Integrative 
Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(24)School of Biological Sciences, Illinois State University, Normal, IL.
(25)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
(26)Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
(27)Department of Biology, Reed College, Portland, OR.
(28)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3031.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2020 Dec;21(12):719.

Bumblebees are a diverse group of globally important pollinators in natural 
ecosystems and for agricultural food production. With both eusocial and solitary 
life-cycle phases, and some social parasite species, they are especially 
interesting models to understand social evolution, behavior, and ecology. 
Reports of many species in decline point to pathogen transmission, habitat loss, 
pesticide usage, and global climate change, as interconnected causes. These 
threats to bumblebee diversity make our reliance on a handful of well-studied 
species for agricultural pollination particularly precarious. To broadly sample 
bumblebee genomic and phenotypic diversity, we de novo sequenced and assembled 
the genomes of 17 species, representing all 15 subgenera, producing the first 
genus-wide quantification of genetic and genomic variation potentially 
underlying key ecological and behavioral traits. The species phylogeny resolves 
subgenera relationships, whereas incomplete lineage sorting likely drives high 
levels of gene tree discordance. Five chromosome-level assemblies show a stable 
18-chromosome karyotype, with major rearrangements creating 25 chromosomes in 
social parasites. Differential transposable element activity drives changes in 
genome sizes, with putative domestications of repetitive sequences influencing 
gene coding and regulatory potential. Dynamically evolving gene families and 
signatures of positive selection point to genus-wide variation in processes 
linked to foraging, diet and metabolism, immunity and detoxification, as well as 
adaptations for life at high altitudes. Our study reveals how bumblebee genes 
and genomes have evolved across the Bombus phylogeny and identifies variations 
potentially linked to key ecological and behavioral traits of these important 
pollinators.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa240
PMCID: PMC7826183
PMID: 32946576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1131. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):465-477. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa237.

Different Sources of Allelic Variation Drove Repeated Color Pattern Divergence 
in Cichlid Fishes.

Urban S(1), Nater A(1), Meyer A(1), Kratochwil CF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.

The adaptive radiations of East African cichlid fish in the Great Lakes 
Victoria, Malawi, and Tanganyika are well known for their diversity and 
repeatedly evolved phenotypes. Convergent evolution of melanic horizontal 
stripes has been linked to a single locus harboring the gene agouti-related 
peptide 2 (agrp2). However, where and when the causal variants underlying this 
trait evolved and how they drove phenotypic divergence remained unknown. To test 
the alternative hypotheses of standing genetic variation versus de novo 
mutations (independently originating in each radiation), we searched for shared 
signals of genomic divergence at the agrp2 locus. Although we discovered similar 
signatures of differentiation at the locus level, the haplotypes associated with 
stripe patterns are surprisingly different. In Lake Malawi, the highest 
associated alleles are located within and close to the 5' untranslated region of 
agrp2 and likely evolved through recent de novo mutations. In the younger Lake 
Victoria radiation, stripes are associated with two intronic regions overlapping 
with a previously reported cis-regulatory interval. The origin of these 
segregating haplotypes predates the Lake Victoria radiation because they are 
also found in more basal riverine and Lake Kivu species. This suggests that both 
segregating haplotypes were present as standing genetic variation at the onset 
of the Lake Victoria adaptive radiation with its more than 500 species and drove 
phenotypic divergence within the species flock. Therefore, both new (Lake 
Malawi) and ancient (Lake Victoria) allelic variation at the same locus fueled 
rapid and convergent phenotypic evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa237
PMCID: PMC7826197
PMID: 32941629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1132. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):716-726. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa239.

Signatures of Introgression across the Allele Frequency Spectrum.

Martin SH(1), Amos W(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

The detection of introgression from genomic data is transforming our view of 
species and the origins of adaptive variation. Among the most widely used 
approaches to detect introgression is the so-called ABBA-BABA test or 
D-statistic, which identifies excess allele sharing between nonsister taxa. Part 
of the appeal of D is its simplicity, but this also limits its informativeness, 
particularly about the timing and direction of introgression. Here we present a 
simple extension, D frequency spectrum or DFS, in which D is partitioned 
according to the frequencies of derived alleles. We use simulations over a large 
parameter space to show how DFS carries information about various factors. In 
particular, recent introgression reliably leads to a peak in DFS among 
low-frequency derived alleles, whereas violation of model assumptions can lead 
to a lack of signal at low frequencies. We also reanalyze published empirical 
data from six different animal and plant taxa, and interpret the results in the 
light of our simulations, showing how DFS provides novel insights. We currently 
see DFS as a descriptive tool that will augment both simple and sophisticated 
tests for introgression, but in the future it may be usefully incorporated into 
probabilistic inference frameworks.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa239
PMCID: PMC7826190
PMID: 32941617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1133. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):838-855. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa236.

Historical Introgression from Wild Relatives Enhanced Climatic Adaptation and 
Resistance to Pneumonia in Sheep.

Cao YH(1)(2), Xu SS(1)(2), Shen M(3)(4), Chen ZH(1)(2), Gao L(3)(4), Lv 
FH(1)(5), Xie XL(1)(2), Wang XH(3)(4), Yang H(3)(4), Liu CB(3)(4), Zhou P(3)(4), 
Wan PC(3)(4), Zhang YS(3)(4), Yang JQ(3)(4), Pi WH(3)(4), Hehua E(6), Berry 
DP(7), Barbato M(8), Esmailizadeh A(9), Nosrati M(10), Salehian-Dehkordi 
H(1)(2), Dehghani-Qanatqestani M(9), Dotsev AV(11), Deniskova TE(11), Zinovieva 
NA(11), Brem G(12), Štěpánek O(13), Ciani E(14), Weimann C(15), Erhardt G(15), 
Mwacharo JM(16), Ahbara A(17), Han JL(18)(19), Hanotte O(17)(20)(21), Miller 
JM(22), Sim Z(22)(23), Coltman D(22), Kantanen J(24), Bruford MW(25)(26), 
Lenstra JA(27), Kijas J(28), Li MH(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS), 
Beijing, China.
(3)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Xinjiang Academy of 
Agricultural and Reclamation Sciences, Shihezi, China.
(4)Xinjiang Academy of Agricultural and Reclamation Sciences, State Key 
Laboratory of Sheep Genetic Improvement and Healthy Breeding, Shihezi, China.
(5)College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing, China.
(6)Institute of Animal Science, Ningxia Academy of Agriculture and Forestry 
Sciences, Hui Autonomous Region, Yinchuan, Ningxia, China.
(7)Animal and Grassland Research and Innovation Centre, Teagasc, Moorepark, 
Fermoy, Co. Cork, Ireland.
(8)Department of Animal Sciences, Food and Nutrition, Università Cattolica del 
Sacro Cuore, Piacenza, Italy.
(9)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Shahid Bahonar 
University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran.
(10)Department of Agriculture, Payame Noor University, Tehran, Iran.
(11)L.K. Ernst Federal Science Center for Animal Husbandry, Moscow Region, 
Podolsk, Russian Federation.
(12)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary 
Medicine, Vienna, Austria.
(13)Department of Virology, State Veterinary Institute Jihlava, Jihlava, Czech 
Republic.
(14)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Biotecnologie e Biofarmaceutica, Università 
degli Studi di Bari Aldo 24, Moro, Bari, Italy.
(15)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Justus-Liebig-University 
Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(16)Small Ruminant Genomics, International Center for Agricultural Research in 
the Dry Areas (ICARDA), Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
(17)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, 
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(18)CAAS-ILRI Joint Laboratory on Livestock and Forage Genetic Resources, 
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), 
Beijing, China.
(19)Livestock Genetics Program, International Livestock Research Institute 
(ILRI), Nairobi, Kenya.
(20)Livestock Genetics Program, International Livestock Research Institute 
(ILRI), Addis Abeba, Ethiopia.
(21)Center for Tropical Livestock Genetics and Health (CTLGH), The Roslin 
Institute, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, Midlothian, United Kingdom.
(22)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, 
Canada.
(23)Fish and Wildlife Enforcement Branch Forensic Unit, Government of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(24)Production Systems, Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke), Jokioinen, 
Finland.
(25)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cathays Park, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom.
(26)Sustainable Places Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom.
(27)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(28)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Agriculture and 
Food, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St Lucia, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

How animals, particularly livestock, adapt to various climates and environments 
over short evolutionary time is of fundamental biological interest. Further, 
understanding the genetic mechanisms of adaptation in indigenous livestock 
populations is important for designing appropriate breeding programs to cope 
with the impacts of changing climate. Here, we conducted a comprehensive genomic 
analysis of diversity, interspecies introgression, and climate-mediated 
selective signatures in a global sample of sheep and their wild relatives. By 
examining 600K and 50K genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism data from 
3,447 samples representing 111 domestic sheep populations and 403 samples from 
all their seven wild relatives (argali, Asiatic mouflon, European mouflon, 
urial, snow sheep, bighorn, and thinhorn sheep), coupled with 88 whole-genome 
sequences, we detected clear signals of common introgression from wild relatives 
into sympatric domestic populations, thereby increasing their genomic 
diversities. The introgressions provided beneficial genetic variants in native 
populations, which were significantly associated with local climatic adaptation. 
We observed common introgression signals of alleles in olfactory-related genes 
(e.g., ADCY3 and TRPV1) and the PADI gene family including in particular PADI2, 
which is associated with antibacterial innate immunity. Further analyses of 
whole-genome sequences showed that the introgressed alleles in a specific region 
of PADI2 (chr2: 248,302,667-248,306,614) correlate with resistance to pneumonia. 
We conclude that wild introgression enhanced climatic adaptation and resistance 
to pneumonia in sheep. This has enabled them to adapt to varying climatic and 
environmental conditions after domestication.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa236
PMCID: PMC7947771
PMID: 32941615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1134. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):702-715. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa231.

Potential Pathogenicity Determinants Identified from Structural Proteomics of 
SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2.

Prates ET(1)(2), Garvin MR(1)(2), Pavicic M(1)(2), Jones P(2)(3), Shah M(4), 
Demerdash O(1), Amos BK(5), Geiger A(2)(3), Jacobson D(1)(2)(3)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN.
(2)National Virtual Biotechnology Laboratory, US Department of Energy, TN.
(3)The Bredesen Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Graduate Education, 
The University of Tennessee Knoxville, Knoxville, TN.
(4)Genome Science and Technology, The University of Tennessee Knoxville, 
Knoxville, TN.
(5)Department of Horticulture, N-318 Ag Sciences Center, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY.
(6)Department of Psychology, The University of Tennessee Knoxville, Knoxville, 
TN.

Despite SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 being equipped with highly similar protein 
arsenals, the corresponding zoonoses have spread among humans at extremely 
different rates. The specific characteristics of these viruses that led to such 
distinct outcomes remain unclear. Here, we apply proteome-wide comparative 
structural analysis aiming to identify the unique molecular elements in the 
SARS-CoV-2 proteome that may explain the differing consequences. By combining 
protein modeling and molecular dynamics simulations, we suggest nonconservative 
substitutions in functional regions of the spike glycoprotein (S), nsp1, and 
nsp3 that are contributing to differences in virulence. Particularly, we explain 
why the substitutions at the receptor-binding domain of S affect the 
structure-dynamics behavior in complexes with putative host receptors. 
Conservation of functional protein regions within the two taxa is also 
noteworthy. We suggest that the highly conserved main protease, nsp5, of 
SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 is part of their mechanism of circumventing the host 
interferon antiviral response. Overall, most substitutions occur on the protein 
surfaces and may be modulating their antigenic properties and interactions with 
other macromolecules. Our results imply that the striking difference in the 
pervasiveness of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV among humans seems to significantly 
derive from molecular features that modulate the efficiency of viral particles 
in entering the host cells and blocking the host immune response.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa231
PMCID: PMC7543629
PMID: 32941612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1135. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):478-485. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa238.

Tracing the Diploid Ancestry of the Cultivated Octoploid Strawberry.

Feng C(1)(2), Wang J(3), Harris AJ(1)(2)(4), Folta KM(5), Zhao M(3), Kang 
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources Conservation and Sustainable Utilization, 
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Center of Conservation Biology, Core Botanical Gardens, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Institute of Pomology, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Jiangsu Key 
Laboratory for Horticultural Crop Genetic Improvement, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Biology, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH.
(5)Horticultural Sciences Department, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.

The commercial strawberry, Fragaria × ananassa, is a recent allo-octoploid that 
is cultivated worldwide. However, other than Fragaria vesca, which is 
universally accepted one of its diploid ancestors, its other early diploid 
progenitors remain unclear. Here, we performed comparative analyses of the 
genomes of five diploid strawberries, F. iinumae, F. vesca, F. nilgerrensis, 
F. nubicola, and F. viridis, of which the latter three are newly sequenced. We 
found that the genomes of these species share highly conserved gene content and 
gene order. Using an alignment-based approach, we show that F. iinumae and 
F. vesca are the diploid progenitors to the octoploid F. × ananassa, whereas the 
other three diploids that we analyzed in this study are not parental species. We 
generated a fully resolved, dated phylogeny of Fragaria, and determined that the 
genus arose ∼6.37 Ma. Our results effectively resolve conflicting hypotheses 
regarding the putative diploid progenitors of the cultivated strawberry, 
establish a reliable backbone phylogeny for the genus, and provide genetic 
resources for molecular breeding.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa238
PMCID: PMC7826170
PMID: 32941604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1136. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):331-343. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa235.

Polyphenism of a Novel Trait Integrated Rapidly Evolving Genes into Ancestrally 
Plastic Networks.

Casasa S(1), Biddle JF(1), Koutsovoulos GD(2), Ragsdale EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Bloomington, IN.
(2)Institute National de la Recherche Agronomique, Sophia-Antipolis, PACA, 
France.

Developmental polyphenism, the ability to switch between phenotypes in response 
to environmental variation, involves the alternating activation of 
environmentally sensitive genes. Consequently, to understand how a polyphenic 
response evolves requires a comparative analysis of the components that make up 
environmentally sensitive networks. Here, we inferred coexpression networks for 
a morphological polyphenism, the feeding-structure dimorphism of the nematode 
Pristionchus pacificus. In this species, individuals produce alternative forms 
of a novel trait-moveable teeth, which in one morph enable predatory feeding-in 
response to environmental cues. To identify the origins of polyphenism network 
components, we independently inferred coexpression modules for more conserved 
transcriptional responses, including in an ancestrally nonpolyphenic nematode 
species. Further, through genome-wide analyses of these components across the 
nematode family (Diplogastridae) in which the polyphenism arose, we 
reconstructed how network components have changed. To achieve this, we assembled 
and resolved the phylogenetic context for five genomes of species representing 
the breadth of Diplogastridae and a hypothesized outgroup. We found that gene 
networks instructing alternative forms arose from ancestral plastic responses to 
environment, specifically starvation-induced metabolism and the formation of a 
conserved diapause (dauer) stage. Moreover, loci from rapidly evolving gene 
families were integrated into these networks with higher connectivity than 
throughout the rest of the P. pacificus transcriptome. In summary, we show that 
the modular regulatory outputs of a polyphenic response evolved through the 
integration of conserved plastic responses into networks with genes of high 
evolutionary turnover.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa235
PMCID: PMC7826178
PMID: 32931588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1137. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):437-448. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa232.

Unraveling the Genetic Basis for the Rapid Diversification of Male Genitalia 
between Drosophila Species.

Hagen JFD(1), Mendes CC(1), Booth SR(1), Figueras Jimenez J(1), Tanaka KM(1), 
Franke FA(1), Baudouin-Gonzalez L(1), Ridgway AM(1), Arif S(1)(2), Nunes 
MDS(1)(2), McGregor AP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Medical Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Functional Genomics, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Oct 7;39(10):

In the last 240,000 years, males of the Drosophila simulans species clade have 
evolved striking differences in the morphology of their epandrial posterior 
lobes and claspers (surstyli). These appendages are used for grasping the female 
during mating and so their divergence is most likely driven by sexual selection. 
Mapping studies indicate a highly polygenic and generally additive genetic basis 
for these morphological differences. However, we have limited understanding of 
the gene regulatory networks that control the development of genital structures 
and how they evolved to result in this rapid phenotypic diversification. Here, 
we used new D. simulans/D. mauritiana introgression lines on chromosome arm 3L 
to generate higher resolution maps of posterior lobe and clasper differences 
between these species. We then carried out RNA-seq on the developing genitalia 
of both species to identify the expressed genes and those that are 
differentially expressed between the two species. This allowed us to test the 
function of expressed positional candidates during genital development in 
D. melanogaster. We identified several new genes involved in the development and 
possibly the evolution of these genital structures, including the transcription 
factors Hairy and Grunge. Furthermore, we discovered that during clasper 
development Hairy negatively regulates tartan (trn), a gene known to contribute 
to divergence in clasper morphology. Taken together, our results provide new 
insights into the regulation of genital development and how this has evolved 
between species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa232
PMCID: PMC7826188
PMID: 32931587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1138. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):449-464. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa233.

The Genomic Basis of Rapid Adaptation to Antibiotic Combination Therapy in 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Barbosa C(1), Mahrt N(1), Bunk J(1), Graßer M(1), Rosenstiel P(2), Jansen 
G(1)(3), Schulenburg H(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Ecology and Genetics, University of Kiel, Kiel, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, UKSH, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Personalized Healthcare, Data Science Analytics, Roche, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Ploen, Germany.

Combination therapy is a common antibiotic treatment strategy that aims at 
minimizing the risk of resistance evolution in several infectious diseases. 
Nonetheless, evidence supporting its efficacy against the nosocomial 
opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa remains elusive. Identification of 
the possible evolutionary paths to resistance in multidrug environments can help 
to explain treatment outcome. For this purpose, we here performed whole-genome 
sequencing of 127 previously evolved populations of P. aeruginosa adapted to 
sublethal doses of distinct antibiotic combinations and corresponding 
single-drug treatments, and experimentally characterized several of the 
identified variants. We found that alterations in the regulation of efflux pumps 
are the most favored mechanism of resistance, regardless of the environment. 
Unexpectedly, we repeatedly identified intergenic variants in the adapted 
populations, often with no additional mutations and usually associated with 
genes involved in efflux pump expression, possibly indicating a regulatory 
function of the intergenic regions. The experimental analysis of these variants 
demonstrated that the intergenic changes caused similar increases in resistance 
against single and multidrug treatments as those seen for efflux regulatory gene 
mutants. Surprisingly, we could find no substantial fitness costs for a majority 
of these variants, most likely enhancing their competitiveness toward sensitive 
cells, even in antibiotic-free environments. We conclude that the regulation of 
efflux is a central target of antibiotic-mediated selection in P. aeruginosa and 
that, importantly, changes in intergenic regions may represent a usually 
neglected alternative process underlying bacterial resistance evolution, which 
clearly deserves further attention in the future.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa233
PMCID: PMC7826179
PMID: 32931584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1139. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):819-837. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa234.

Complex Evolution of Light-Dependent Protochlorophyllide Oxidoreductases in 
Aerobic Anoxygenic Phototrophs: Origin, Phylogeny, and Function.

Chernomor O(1), Peters L(2), Schneidewind J(2), Loeschcke A(2), Knieps-Grünhagen 
E(2), Schmitz F(2), von Lieres E(3), Kutta RJ(4), Svensson V(2), Jaeger 
KE(2)(3), Drepper T(2), von Haeseler A(1)(5), Krauss U(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrative Bioinformatics Vienna, Max Perutz Labs, University of 
Vienna, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institut für Molekulare Enzymtechnologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität 
Düsseldorf, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.
(3)Institute of Bio- and Geosciences IBG-1: Biotechnology, Forschungszentrum 
Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.
(4)Institut für Physikalische und Theoretische Chemie, Universität Regensburg, 
Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Faculty of Computer Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Light-dependent protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase (LPOR) and dark-operative 
protochlorophyllide oxidoreductase are evolutionary and structurally distinct 
enzymes that are essential for the synthesis of (bacterio)chlorophyll, the 
primary pigment needed for both anoxygenic and oxygenic photosynthesis. In 
contrast to the long-held hypothesis that LPORs are only present in oxygenic 
phototrophs, we recently identified a functional LPOR in the aerobic anoxygenic 
phototrophic bacterium (AAPB) Dinoroseobacter shibae and attributed its presence 
to a single horizontal gene transfer event from cyanobacteria. Here, we provide 
evidence for the more widespread presence of genuine LPOR enzymes in AAPBs. An 
exhaustive bioinformatics search identified 36 putative LPORs outside of 
oxygenic phototrophic bacteria (cyanobacteria) with the majority being AAPBs. 
Using in vitro and in vivo assays, we show that the large majority of the tested 
AAPB enzymes are genuine LPORs. Solution structural analyses, performed for two 
of the AAPB LPORs, revealed a globally conserved structure when compared with a 
well-characterized cyanobacterial LPOR. Phylogenetic analyses suggest that LPORs 
were transferred not only from cyanobacteria but also subsequently between 
proteobacteria and from proteobacteria to Gemmatimonadetes. Our study thus 
provides another interesting example for the complex evolutionary processes that 
govern the evolution of bacteria, involving multiple horizontal gene transfer 
events that likely occurred at different time points and involved different 
donors.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa234
PMCID: PMC7947762
PMID: 32931580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1140. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3699-3700. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa205.

A Report by the Editor-in-Chief for Molecular Biology and Evolution (MBE), 
Volume 36.

Kumar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Temple University, Institute for Genomics and 
Evolutionary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa205
PMCID: PMC7743802
PMID: 32930791


1141. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3485-3506. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa183.

The Molecular Machinery of Gametogenesis in Geodia Demosponges (Porifera): 
Evolutionary Origins of a Conserved Toolkit across Animals.

Koutsouveli V(1)(2), Cárdenas P(2), Santodomingo N(1), Marina A(3), Morato E(3), 
Rapp HT(4), Riesgo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, The Natural History Museum of London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Pharmacognosy, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Uppsala University, BMC, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Servicio de Proteómica, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CBMSO), 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM) and Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

All animals are capable of undergoing gametogenesis. The ability of forming 
haploid cells from diploid cells through meiosis and recombination appeared 
early in eukaryotes, whereas further gamete differentiation is mostly a metazoan 
signature. Morphologically, the gametogenic process presents many similarities 
across animal taxa, but little is known about its conservation at the molecular 
level. Porifera are the earliest divergent animals and therefore are an ideal 
phylum to understand evolution of the gametogenic toolkits. Although sponge 
gametogenesis is well known at the histological level, the molecular toolkits 
for gamete production are largely unknown. Our goal was to identify the genes 
and their expression levels which regulate oogenesis and spermatogenesis in five 
gonochoristic and oviparous species of the genus Geodia, using both RNAseq and 
proteomic analyses. In the early stages of both female and male gametogenesis, 
genes involved in germ cell fate and cell-renewal were upregulated. Then, 
molecular signals involved in retinoic acid pathway could trigger the meiotic 
processes. During later stages of oogenesis, female sponges expressed genes 
involved in cell growth, vitellogenesis, and extracellular matrix reassembly, 
which are conserved elements of oocyte maturation in Metazoa. Likewise, in 
spermatogenesis, genes regulating the whole meiotic cycle, chromatin compaction, 
and flagellum axoneme formation, that are common across Metazoa were 
overexpressed in the sponges. Finally, molecular signals possibly related to 
sperm capacitation were identified during late stages of spermatogenesis for the 
first time in Porifera. In conclusion, the activated molecular toolkit during 
gametogenesis in sponges was remarkably similar to that deployed during 
gametogenesis in vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa183
PMCID: PMC7743902
PMID: 32929503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1142. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):805-818. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa229.

Dioecy Is Associated with High Genetic Diversity and Adaptation Rates in the 
Plant Genus Silene.

Muyle A(1)(2), Martin H(3)(4), Zemp N(5)(6), Mollion M(7), Gallina S(3), Tavares 
R(1), Silva A(8), Bataillon T(7), Widmer A(5), Glémin S(9)(10), Touzet P(3), 
Marais GAB(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive (UMR 5558), CNRS/Université 
Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, UC Irvine, Irvine, CA.
(3)University of Lille, CNRS, UMR 8198-Evo-Eco-Paleo, F-59000 Lille, France.
(4)Département de Biologie, Institut de Biologie Integrative et des Systèmes, 
Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(5)Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Genetic Diversity Centre (GDC), ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(7)Bioinformatics Research Centre, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(8)Centro de Interpretação da Serra da Estrela (CISE), Seia, Portugal.
(9)CNRS, ECOBIO [(Ecosystèmes, Biodiversité, Évolution)]-UMR 6553, University of 
Rennes, Rennes, France.
(10)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Evolutionary Biology Center and Science 
for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

About 15,000 angiosperm species (∼6%) have separate sexes, a phenomenon known as 
dioecy. Why dioecious taxa are so rare is still an open question. Early work 
reported lower species richness in dioecious compared with nondioecious sister 
clades, raising the hypothesis that dioecy may be an evolutionary dead-end. This 
hypothesis has been recently challenged by macroevolutionary analyses that 
detected no or even positive effect of dioecy on diversification. However, the 
possible genetic consequences of dioecy at the population level, which could 
drive the long-term fate of dioecious lineages, have not been tested so far. 
Here, we used a population genomics approach in the Silene genus to look for 
possible effects of dioecy, especially for potential evidence of evolutionary 
handicaps of dioecy underlying the dead-end hypothesis. We collected 
individual-based RNA-seq data from several populations in 13 closely related 
species with different sexual systems: seven dioecious, three hermaphroditic, 
and three gynodioecious species. We show that dioecy is associated with 
increased genetic diversity, as well as higher selection efficacy both against 
deleterious mutations and for beneficial mutations. The results hold after 
controlling for phylogenetic inertia, differences in species census population 
sizes and geographic ranges. We conclude that dioecious Silene species neither 
show signs of increased mutational load nor genetic evidence for extinction 
risk. We discuss these observations in the light of the possible demographic 
differences between dioecious and self-compatible hermaphroditic species and how 
this could be related to alternatives to the dead-end hypothesis to explain the 
rarity of dioecy.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa229
PMCID: PMC7947750
PMID: 32926156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1143. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3243-3257. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa182.

Comprehensive and Functional Analysis of Horizontal Gene Transfer Events in 
Diatoms.

Vancaester E(1)(2)(3), Depuydt T(1)(2)(3), Osuna-Cruz CM(1)(2)(3), Vandepoele 
K(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Bioinformatics Institute Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

Diatoms are a diverse group of mainly photosynthetic algae, responsible for 20% 
of worldwide oxygen production, which can rapidly respond to favorable 
conditions and often outcompete other phytoplankton. We investigated the 
contribution of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) to its ecological success. A 
large-scale phylogeny-based prokaryotic HGT detection procedure across nine 
sequenced diatoms showed that 3-5% of their proteome has a horizontal origin and 
a large influx occurred at the ancestor of diatoms. More than 90% of HGT genes 
are expressed, and species-specific HGT genes in Phaeodactylum tricornutum 
undergo strong purifying selection. Genes derived from HGT are implicated in 
several processes including environmental sensing and expand the metabolic 
toolbox. Cobalamin (vitamin B12) is an essential cofactor for roughly half of 
the diatoms and is only produced by bacteria. Five consecutive genes involved in 
the final synthesis of the cobalamin biosynthetic pathway, which could function 
as scavenging and repair genes, were detected as HGT. The full suite of these 
genes was detected in the cold-adapted diatom Fragilariopsis cylindrus. This 
might give diatoms originating from the Southern Ocean, a region typically 
depleted in cobalamin, a competitive advantage. Overall, we show that HGT is a 
prevalent mechanism that is actively used in diatoms to expand its adaptive 
capabilities.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa182
PMID: 32918458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1144. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):424-436. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa230.

Modularity in Protein Evolution: Modular Organization and De Novo Domain 
Evolution in Mollusk Metallothioneins.

Calatayud S(1), Garcia-Risco M(2), Pedrini-Martha V(3), Eernisse DJ(4), 
Dallinger R(3), Palacios Ò(2), Capdevila M(2), Albalat R(1).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística and Institut de Recerca 
de la Biodiversitat (IRBio), Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Departament de Química, Facultat de Ciències, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Spain.
(3)Department of Zoology and Center for Molecular Biosciences Innsbruck (CMBI), 
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(4)Department of Biological Science, California State University Fullerton, 
Fullerton, CA.

Metallothioneins (MTs) are proteins devoted to the control of metal homeostasis 
and detoxification, and therefore, MTs have been crucial for the adaptation of 
the living beings to variable situations of metal bioavailability. The evolution 
of MTs is, however, not yet fully understood, and to provide new insights into 
it, we have investigated the MTs in the diverse classes of Mollusks. We have 
shown that most molluskan MTs are bimodular proteins that combine six domains-α, 
β1, β2, β3, γ, and δ-in a lineage-specific manner. We have functionally 
characterized the Neritimorpha β3β1 and the Patellogastropoda γβ1 MTs, 
demonstrating the metal-binding capacity of the new γ domain. Our results have 
revealed a modular organization of mollusk MT, whose evolution has been impacted 
by duplication, loss, and de novo emergence of domains. MTs represent a 
paradigmatic example of modular evolution probably driven by the structural and 
functional requirements of metal binding.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa230
PMCID: PMC7826182
PMID: 32915992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1145. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):686-701. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa228.

Phylogenomic Resolution of Sea Spider Diversification through Integration of 
Multiple Data Classes.

Ballesteros JA(1), Setton EVW(1), Santibáñez-López CE(1), Arango CP(2), Brenneis 
G(3), Brix S(4), Corbett KF(1), Cano-Sánchez E(5), Dandouch M(6), Dilly GF(6), 
Eleaume MP(7), Gainett G(1), Gallut C(8), McAtee S(6), McIntyre L(6), Moran 
AL(9), Moran R(6), López-González PJ(5), Scholtz G(10), Williamson C(6), Woods 
HA(11), Zehms JT(1), Wheeler WC(12), Sharma PP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
WI.
(2)Queensland Museum, Biodiversity Program, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(3)Zoologisches Institut und Museum, Cytologie und Evolutionsbiologie, 
Universität Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(4)Senckenberg am Meer, German Centre for Marine Biodiversity Research (DZMB), 
c/o Biocenter Grindel (CeNak), Martin-Luther-King-Platz 3, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Biodiversidad y Ecología Acuática, Departamento de Zoología, Facultad de 
Biología, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.
(6)Department of Biology, California State University-Channel Islands, 
Camarillo, CA.
(7)Départment Milieux et Peuplements Aquatiques, Muséum National d'Histoire 
Naturelle, Paris, France.
(8)Institut de Systématique, Évolution, Biodiversité (ISYEB), Sorbonne 
Université, CNRS, Concarneau, France.
(9)Department of Biology, University of Hawai'I at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI.
(10)Institut für Biologie, Vergleichende Zoologie, Humboldt-Universität zu 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(11)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT.
(12)Division of Invertebrate Zoology, American Museum of Natural History, New 
York City, NY.

Despite significant advances in invertebrate phylogenomics over the past decade, 
the higher-level phylogeny of Pycnogonida (sea spiders) remains elusive. Due to 
the inaccessibility of some small-bodied lineages, few phylogenetic studies have 
sampled all sea spider families. Previous efforts based on a handful of genes 
have yielded unstable tree topologies. Here, we inferred the relationships of 89 
sea spider species using targeted capture of the mitochondrial genome, 56 
conserved exons, 101 ultraconserved elements, and 3 nuclear ribosomal genes. We 
inferred molecular divergence times by integrating morphological data for fossil 
species to calibrate 15 nodes in the arthropod tree of life. This integration of 
data classes resolved the basal topology of sea spiders with high support. The 
enigmatic family Austrodecidae was resolved as the sister group to the remaining 
Pycnogonida and the small-bodied family Rhynchothoracidae as the sister group of 
the robust-bodied family Pycnogonidae. Molecular divergence time estimation 
recovered a basal divergence of crown group sea spiders in the Ordovician. 
Comparison of diversification dynamics with other marine invertebrate taxa that 
originated in the Paleozoic suggests that sea spiders and some crustacean groups 
exhibit resilience to mass extinction episodes, relative to mollusk and 
echinoderm lineages.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa228
PMCID: PMC7826184
PMID: 32915961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1146. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):777-787. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa219.

Genome Duplication Increases Meiotic Recombination Frequency: A Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae Model.

Fang O(1), Wang L(1), Zhang Y(1), Yang J(1), Tao Q(1), Zhang F(1)(2), Luo 
Z(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Population and Quantitative Genetics, Institute of 
Biostatistics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Qinghai Academy of Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Xining, Qinghai, China.
(3)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Genetic recombination characterized by reciprocal exchange of genes on paired 
homologous chromosomes is the most prominent event in meiosis of almost all 
sexually reproductive organisms. It contributes to genome stability by ensuring 
the balanced segregation of paired homologs in meiosis, and it is also the major 
driving factor in generating genetic variation for natural and artificial 
selection. Meiotic recombination is subjected to the control of a highly 
stringent and complex regulating process and meiotic recombination frequency 
(MRF) may be affected by biological and abiotic factors such as sex, gene 
density, nucleotide content, and chemical/temperature treatments, having 
motivated tremendous researches for artificially manipulating MRF. Whether 
genome polyploidization would lead to a significant change in MRF has attracted 
both historical and recent research interests; however, tackling this 
fundamental question is methodologically challenging due to the lack of 
appropriate methods for tetrasomic genetic analysis, thus has led to 
controversial conclusions in the literature. This article presents a 
comprehensive and rigorous survey of genome duplication-mediated change in MRF 
using Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a eukaryotic model. It demonstrates that 
genome duplication can lead to consistently significant increase in MRF and rate 
of crossovers across all 16 chromosomes of S. cerevisiae, including both cold 
and hot spots of MRF. This ploidy-driven change in MRF is associated with 
weakened recombination interference, enhanced double-strand break density, and 
loosened chromatin histone occupation. The study illuminates a significant 
evolutionary feature of genome duplication and opens an opportunity to 
accelerate response to artificial and natural selection through 
polyploidization.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa219
PMCID: PMC7947769
PMID: 32898273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1147. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):663-675. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa226.

Evolutionary Genomics of Niche-Specific Adaptation to the Cystic Fibrosis Lung 
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Dettman JR(1), Kassen R(2).

Author information:
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

The comparative genomics of the transition of the opportunistic pathogen 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa from a free-living environmental strain to one that 
causes chronic infection in the airways of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients remain 
poorly studied. Chronic infections are thought to originate from colonization by 
a single strain sampled from a diverse, globally distributed population, 
followed by adaptive evolution to the novel, stressful conditions of the CF 
lung. However, we do not know whether certain clades are more likely to form 
chronic infections than others and we lack a comprehensive view of the suite of 
genes under positive selection in the CF lung. We analyzed whole-genome sequence 
data from 1,000 P. aeruginosa strains with diverse ecological provenances 
including the CF lung. CF isolates were distributed across the phylogeny, 
indicating little genetic predisposition for any one clade to cause chronic 
infection. Isolates from the CF niche experienced stronger positive selection on 
core genes than those derived from environmental or acute infection sources, 
consistent with recent adaptation to the lung environment. Genes with the 
greatest differential positive selection in the CF niche include those involved 
in core cellular processes such as metabolism, energy production, and stress 
response as well as those linked to patho-adaptive processes such as antibiotic 
resistance, cell wall and membrane modification, quorum sensing, biofilms, 
mucoidy, motility, and iron homeostasis. Many genes under CF-specific 
differential positive selection had regulatory functions, consistent with the 
idea that regulatory mutations play an important role in rapid adaptation to 
novel environments.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa226
PMCID: PMC7826180
PMID: 32898270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1148. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):676-685. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa227.

Ecological Load and Balancing Selection in Circumboreal Barnacles.

Nunez JCB(1), Rong S(1)(2), Damian-Serrano A(3), Burley JT(1)(4), Elyanow RG(2), 
Ferranti DA(1), Neil KB(1), Glenner H(5), Rosenblad MA(6), Blomberg A(6), 
Johannesson K(7), Rand DM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Brown University, Providence, 
RI.
(2)Center for Computational Molecular Biology, Brown University, Providence, RI.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT.
(4)Institute at Brown for Environment and Society, Brown University, Providence, 
RI.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, 
Lundberg Laboratory, Göteborg, Sweden.
(7)Department of Marine Sciences, University of Gothenburg, Tjärnö Marine 
Laboratory, Strömstad, Sweden.

Acorn barnacle adults experience environmental heterogeneity at various spatial 
scales of their circumboreal habitat, raising the question of how adaptation to 
high environmental variability is maintained in the face of strong juvenile 
dispersal and mortality. Here, we show that 4% of genes in the barnacle genome 
experience balancing selection across the entire range of the species. Many of 
these genes harbor mutations maintained across 2 My of evolution between the 
Pacific and Atlantic oceans. These genes are involved in ion regulation, pain 
reception, and heat tolerance, functions which are essential in highly variable 
ecosystems. The data also reveal complex population structure within and between 
basins, driven by the trans-Arctic interchange and the last glaciation. 
Divergence between Atlantic and Pacific populations is high, foreshadowing the 
onset of allopatric speciation, and suggesting that balancing selection is 
strong enough to maintain functional variation for millions of years in the face 
of complex demography.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa227
PMCID: PMC7826171
PMID: 32898261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1149. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):393-404. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa214.

Myxosporea (Myxozoa, Cnidaria) Lack DNA Cytosine Methylation.

Kyger R(1), Luzuriaga-Neira A(1), Layman T(2), Milkewitz Sandberg TO(3), Singh 
D(2), Huchon D(3)(4), Peri S(1), Atkinson SD(5), Bartholomew JL(5), Yi SV(2), 
Alvarez-Ponce D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, NV.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.
(3)Department of Zoology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(4)The Steinhardt Museum of Natural History and National Research Center, Tel 
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR.

DNA cytosine methylation is central to many biological processes, including 
regulation of gene expression, cellular differentiation, and development. This 
DNA modification is conserved across animals, having been found in 
representatives of sponges, ctenophores, cnidarians, and bilaterians, and with 
very few known instances of secondary loss in animals. Myxozoans are a group of 
microscopic, obligate endoparasitic cnidarians that have lost many genes over 
the course of their evolution from free-living ancestors. Here, we investigated 
the evolution of the key enzymes involved in DNA cytosine methylation in 29 
cnidarians and found that these enzymes were lost in an ancestor of Myxosporea 
(the most speciose class of Myxozoa). Additionally, using whole-genome bisulfite 
sequencing, we confirmed that the genomes of two distant species of 
myxosporeans, Ceratonova shasta and Henneguya salminicola, completely lack DNA 
cytosine methylation. Our results add a notable and novel taxonomic group, the 
Myxosporea, to the very short list of animal taxa lacking DNA cytosine 
methylation, further illuminating the complex evolutionary history of this 
epigenetic regulatory mechanism.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa214
PMCID: PMC7826176
PMID: 32898240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1150. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):274-289. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa225.

Evaluating the Performance of Malaria Genetics for Inferring Changes in 
Transmission Intensity Using Transmission Modeling.

Watson OJ(1), Okell LC(1), Hellewell J(1), Slater HC(1), Unwin HJT(1), Omedo 
I(2), Bejon P(2), Snow RW(3)(4), Noor AM(5), Rockett K(6), Hubbart C(6), 
Nankabirwa JI(7)(8), Greenhouse B(9), Chang HH(10), Ghani AC(1), Verity R(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, Department of Infectious 
Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Centre for Geographic Medicine 
Research-Coast, Kilifi, Kenya.
(3)Population Health Unit, Kenya Medical Research Institute-Wellcome Trust 
Research Programme, Nairobi, Kenya.
(4)Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of 
Clinical Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Global Malaria Programme, World Health Organization.
(6)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Infectious Diseases Research Collaboration, Kampala, Uganda.
(8)Makerere University College of Health Sciences, Kampala, Uganda.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA.
(10)Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Harvard TH Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA.

Substantial progress has been made globally to control malaria, however there is 
a growing need for innovative new tools to ensure continued progress. One 
approach is to harness genetic sequencing and accompanying methodological 
approaches as have been used in the control of other infectious diseases. 
However, to utilize these methodologies for malaria, we first need to extend the 
methods to capture the complex interactions between parasites, human and vector 
hosts, and environment, which all impact the level of genetic diversity and 
relatedness of malaria parasites. We develop an individual-based transmission 
model to simulate malaria parasite genetics parameterized using estimated 
relationships between complexity of infection and age from five regions in 
Uganda and Kenya. We predict that cotransmission and superinfection contribute 
equally to within-host parasite genetic diversity at 11.5% PCR prevalence, above 
which superinfections dominate. Finally, we characterize the predictive power of 
six metrics of parasite genetics for detecting changes in transmission 
intensity, before grouping them in an ensemble statistical model. The model 
predicted malaria prevalence with a mean absolute error of 0.055. Different 
assumptions about the availability of sample metadata were considered, with the 
most accurate predictions of malaria prevalence made when the clinical status 
and age of sampled individuals is known. Parasite genetics may provide a novel 
surveillance tool for estimating the prevalence of malaria in areas in which 
prevalence surveys are not feasible. However, the findings presented here 
reinforce the need for patient metadata to be recorded and made available within 
all future attempts to use parasite genetics for surveillance.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa225
PMCID: PMC7783189
PMID: 32898225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1151. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3131-3148. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa151.

Consequences of Stability-Induced Epistasis for Substitution Rates.

Youssef N(1)(2), Susko E(2)(3), Bielawski JP(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(2)Centre for Genomics and Evolutionary Bioinformatics, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia, Canada.

Do interactions between residues in a protein (i.e., epistasis) significantly 
alter evolutionary dynamics? If so, what consequences might they have on 
inference from traditional codon substitution models which assume 
site-independence for the sake of computational tractability? To investigate the 
effects of epistasis on substitution rates, we employed a mechanistic 
mutation-selection model in conjunction with a fitness framework derived from 
protein stability. We refer to this as the stability-informed site-dependent 
(S-SD) model and developed a new stability-informed site-independent (S-SI) 
model that captures the average effect of stability constraints on individual 
sites of a protein. Comparison of S-SI and S-SD offers a novel and direct method 
for investigating the consequences of stability-induced epistasis on protein 
evolution. We developed S-SI and S-SD models for three natural proteins and 
showed that they generate sequences consistent with real alignments. Our 
analyses revealed that epistasis tends to increase substitution rates compared 
with the rates under site-independent evolution. We then assessed the epistatic 
sensitivity of individual site and discovered a counterintuitive effect: Highly 
connected sites were less influenced by epistasis relative to exposed sites. 
Lastly, we show that, despite the unrealistic assumptions, traditional models 
perform comparably well in the presence and absence of epistasis and provide 
reasonable summaries of average selection intensities. We conclude that 
epistatic models are critical to understanding protein evolutionary dynamics, 
but epistasis might not be required for reasonable inference of selection 
pressure when averaging over time and sites.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa151
PMID: 32897316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1152. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3353-3362. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa161.

Detecting Signatures of Positive Selection against a Backdrop of Compensatory 
Processes.

Chi PB(1)(2), Kosater WM(2), Liberles DA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Villanova University, Villanova, 
PA.
(2)Department of Biology and Center for Computational Genetics and Genomics, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.

There are known limitations in methods of detecting positive selection. Common 
methods do not enable differentiation between positive selection and 
compensatory covariation, a major limitation. Further, the traditional method of 
calculating the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous substitutions (dN/dS) does 
not take into account the 3D structure of biomacromolecules nor differences 
between amino acids. It also does not account for saturation of synonymous 
mutations (dS) over long evolutionary time that renders codon-based methods 
ineffective for older divergences. This work aims to address these shortcomings 
for detecting positive selection through the development of a statistical model 
that examines clusters of substitutions in clusters of variable radii. 
Additionally, it uses a parametric bootstrapping approach to differentiate 
positive selection from compensatory processes. A previously reported case of 
positive selection in the leptin protein of primates was reexamined using this 
methodology.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa161
PMID: 32895716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1153. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3363-3379. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa163.

Bayesian Evaluation of Temporal Signal in Measurably Evolving Populations.

Duchene S(1), Lemey P(2), Stadler T(3), Ho SYW(4)(5), Duchene DA(6), 
Dhanasekaran V(7), Baele G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for 
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zürich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(6)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash 
University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Phylogenetic methods can use the sampling times of molecular sequence data to 
calibrate the molecular clock, enabling the estimation of evolutionary rates and 
timescales for rapidly evolving pathogens and data sets containing ancient DNA 
samples. A key aspect of such calibrations is whether a sufficient amount of 
molecular evolution has occurred over the sampling time window, that is, whether 
the data can be treated as having come from a measurably evolving population. 
Here, we investigate the performance of a fully Bayesian evaluation of temporal 
signal (BETS) in sequence data. The method involves comparing the fit to the 
data of two models: a model in which the data are accompanied by the actual 
(heterochronous) sampling times, and a model in which the samples are 
constrained to be contemporaneous (isochronous). We conducted simulations under 
a wide range of conditions to demonstrate that BETS accurately classifies data 
sets according to whether they contain temporal signal or not, even when there 
is substantial among-lineage rate variation. We explore the behavior of this 
classification in analyses of five empirical data sets: modern samples of A/H1N1 
influenza virus, the bacterium Bordetella pertussis, coronaviruses from 
mammalian hosts, ancient DNA from Hepatitis B virus, and mitochondrial genomes 
of dog species. Our results indicate that BETS is an effective alternative to 
other tests of temporal signal. In particular, this method has the key advantage 
of allowing a coherent assessment of the entire model, including the molecular 
clock and tree prior which are essential aspects of Bayesian phylodynamic 
analyses.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa163
PMCID: PMC7454806
PMID: 32895707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1154. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2463-2464. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa162.

Where Did SARS-CoV-2 Come From?

Leitner T(1), Kumar S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Theroretical Biology and Biophysics group, Los Alamos National Laboratory, 
Los Alamos, NM.
(2)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Center for Excellence in Genome Medicine and Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Identifying the origin of SARS-CoV-2, the etiological agent of the current 
COVID-19 pandemic, may help us to avoid future epidemics of coronavirus and 
other zoonoses. Several theories about the zoonotic origin of SARS-CoV-2 have 
recently been proposed. Although Betacoronavirus found in Rhinolophus bats from 
China have been broadly implicated, their genetic dissimilarity to SARS-CoV-2 is 
so high that they are highly unlikely to be its direct ancestors. Thus, an 
intermediary host is suspected to link bat to human coronaviruses. Based on 
genomic CpG dinucleotide patterns in different coronaviruses from different 
hosts, it was suggested that SARS-CoV-2 might have evolved in a canid 
gastrointestinal tract prior to transmission to humans. However, similar CpG 
patterns are now reported in coronaviruses from other hosts, including bats 
themselves and pangolins. Therefore, reduced genomic CpG alone is not a highly 
predictive biomarker, suggesting a need for additional biomarkers to reveal 
intermediate hosts or tissues. The hunt for the zoonotic origin of SARS-CoV-2 
continues.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa162
PMCID: PMC7454771
PMID: 32893295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1155. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):788-804. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa223.

An Unexpectedly Complex Mitoribosome in Andalucia godoyi, a Protist with the 
Most Bacteria-like Mitochondrial Genome.

Valach M(1), Gonzalez Alcazar JA(1), Sarrasin M(1), Lang BF(1), Gray MW(2), 
Burger G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Robert-Cedergren Centre 
for Bioinformatics and Genomics, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Centre for Comparative 
Genomics and Evolutionary Bioinformatics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia, Canada.

The mitoribosome, as known from studies in model organisms, deviates 
considerably from its ancestor, the bacterial ribosome. Deviations include 
substantial reduction of the mitochondrial ribosomal RNA (mt-rRNA) structure and 
acquisition of numerous mitochondrion-specific (M) mitoribosomal proteins 
(mtRPs). A broadly accepted view assumes that M-mtRPs compensate for structural 
destabilization of mt-rRNA resulting from its evolutionary remodeling. Since 
most experimental information on mitoribosome makeup comes from eukaryotes 
having derived mitochondrial genomes and mt-rRNAs, we tested this assumption by 
investigating the mitochondrial translation machinery of jakobids, a lineage of 
unicellular protists with the most bacteria-like mitochondrial genomes. We 
report here proteomics analyses of the Andalucia godoyi small mitoribosomal 
subunit and in silico transcriptomic and comparative genome analyses of four 
additional jakobids. Jakobids have mt-rRNA structures that minimally differ from 
their bacterial counterparts. Yet, with at least 31 small subunit and 44 large 
subunit mtRPs, the mitoriboproteome of Andalucia is essentially as complex as 
that in animals or fungi. Furthermore, the relatively high conservation of 
jakobid sequences has helped to clarify the identity of several mtRPs, 
previously considered to be lineage-specific, as divergent homologs of conserved 
M-mtRPs, notably mS22 and mL61. The coexistence of bacteria-like mt-rRNAs and a 
complex mitoriboproteome refutes the view that M-mtRPs were ancestrally 
recruited to stabilize deviations of mt-rRNA structural elements. We postulate 
instead that the numerous M-mtRPs acquired in the last eukaryotic common 
ancestor allowed mt-rRNAs to pursue a broad range of evolutionary trajectories 
across lineages: from dramatic reduction to acquisition of novel elements to 
structural conservatism.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa223
PMCID: PMC7947838
PMID: 32886790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1156. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):1151-1167. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa222.

Log Transformation Improves Dating of Phylogenies.

Mai U(1), Mirarab S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UC, San Diego, CA.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, UC, San Diego, CA.

Phylogenetic trees inferred from sequence data often have branch lengths 
measured in the expected number of substitutions and therefore, do not have 
divergence times estimated. These trees give an incomplete view of evolutionary 
histories since many applications of phylogenies require time trees. Many 
methods have been developed to convert the inferred branch lengths from 
substitution unit to time unit using calibration points, but none is universally 
accepted as they are challenged in both scalability and accuracy under complex 
models. Here, we introduce a new method that formulates dating as a nonconvex 
optimization problem where the variance of log-transformed rate multipliers is 
minimized across the tree. On simulated and real data, we show that our method, 
wLogDate, is often more accurate than alternatives and is more robust to various 
model assumptions.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa222
PMCID: PMC7947844
PMID: 32886788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1157. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):727-734. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa224.

CoreCruncher: Fast and Robust Construction of Core Genomes in Large Prokaryotic 
Data Sets.

Harris CD(1), Torrance EL(1), Raymann K(1), Bobay LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina Greensboro, Greensboro, 
NC.

The core genome represents the set of genes shared by all, or nearly all, 
strains of a given population or species of prokaryotes. Inferring the core 
genome is integral to many genomic analyses, however, most methods rely on the 
comparison of all the pairs of genomes; a step that is becoming increasingly 
difficult given the massive accumulation of genomic data. Here, we present 
CoreCruncher; a program that robustly and rapidly constructs core genomes across 
hundreds or thousands of genomes. CoreCruncher does not compute all pairwise 
genome comparisons and uses a heuristic based on the distributions of identity 
scores to classify sequences as orthologs or paralogs/xenologs. Although it is 
much faster than current methods, our results indicate that our approach is more 
conservative than other tools and less sensitive to the presence of paralogs and 
xenologs. CoreCruncher is freely available from: 
https://github.com/lbobay/CoreCruncher. CoreCruncher is written in Python 3.7 
and can also run on Python 2.7 without modification. It requires the python 
library Numpy and either Usearch or Blast. Certain options require the programs 
muscle or mafft.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa224
PMCID: PMC7826169
PMID: 32886787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1158. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3292-3307. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa139.

ASTRAL-Pro: Quartet-Based Species-Tree Inference despite Paralogy.

Zhang C(1), Scornavacca C(2), Molloy EK(3), Mirarab S(4).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, University of California San Diego, San 
Diego, CA.
(2)ISEM, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, EPHE, Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Champaign, IL.
(4)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California 
San Diego, San Diego, CA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Sep 27;38(10):4655.

Phylogenetic inference from genome-wide data (phylogenomics) has revolutionized 
the study of evolution because it enables accounting for discordance among 
evolutionary histories across the genome. To this end, summary methods have been 
developed to allow accurate and scalable inference of species trees from gene 
trees. However, most of these methods, including the widely used ASTRAL, can 
only handle single-copy gene trees and do not attempt to model gene duplication 
and gene loss. As a result, most phylogenomic studies have focused on 
single-copy genes and have discarded large parts of the data. Here, we first 
propose a measure of quartet similarity between single-copy and multicopy trees 
that accounts for orthology and paralogy. We then introduce a method called 
ASTRAL-Pro (ASTRAL for PaRalogs and Orthologs) to find the species tree that 
optimizes our quartet similarity measure using dynamic programing. By studying 
its performance on an extensive collection of simulated data sets and on real 
data sets, we show that ASTRAL-Pro is more accurate than alternative methods.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa139
PMCID: PMC7751180
PMID: 32886770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1159. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):650-662. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa221.

Colocality to Cofunctionality: Eukaryotic Gene Neighborhoods as a Resource for 
Function Discovery.

Foflonker F(1), Blaby-Haas CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Brookhaven National Laboratory, Biology Department, Upton, NY.

Diverging from the classic paradigm of random gene order in eukaryotes, gene 
proximity can be leveraged to systematically identify functionally related gene 
neighborhoods in eukaryotes, utilizing techniques pioneered in bacteria. Current 
methods of identifying gene neighborhoods typically rely on sequence similarity 
to characterized gene products. However, this approach is not robust for 
nonmodel organisms like algae, which are evolutionarily distant from 
well-characterized model organisms. Here, we utilize a comparative genomic 
approach to identify evolutionarily conserved proximal orthologous gene pairs 
conserved across at least two taxonomic classes of green algae. A total of 317 
gene neighborhoods were identified. In some cases, gene proximity appears to 
have been conserved since before the streptophyte-chlorophyte split, 1,000 Ma. 
Using functional inferences derived from reconstructed evolutionary 
relationships, we identified several novel functional clusters. A putative 
mycosporine-like amino acid, "sunscreen," neighborhood contains genes similar to 
either vertebrate or cyanobacterial pathways, suggesting a novel mosaic 
biosynthetic pathway in green algae. One of two putative arsenic-detoxification 
neighborhoods includes an organoarsenical transporter (ArsJ), a glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate dehydrogenase-like gene, homologs of which are involved in arsenic 
detoxification in bacteria, and a novel algal-specific phosphoglycerate 
kinase-like gene. Mutants of the ArsJ-like transporter and phosphoglycerate 
kinase-like genes in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii were found to be sensitive to 
arsenate, providing experimental support for the role of these identified 
neighbors in resistance to arsenate. Potential evolutionary origins of 
neighborhoods are discussed, and updated annotations for formerly poorly 
annotated genes are presented, highlighting the potential of this strategy for 
functional annotation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa221
PMCID: PMC7826186
PMID: 32886760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1160. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):3081. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa165.

Corrigendum to: Bacterial Group II Intron Genomic Neighborhoods Reflect Survival 
Strategies: Hiding and Hijacking.

Waldern J, Schiraldi NJ, Belfort M, Novikova O.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1942-1948.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa165
PMCID: PMC7530602
PMID: 32885251


1161. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):405-423. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa218.

Few Fixed Variants between Trophic Specialist Pupfish Species Reveal Candidate 
Cis-Regulatory Alleles Underlying Rapid Craniofacial Divergence.

McGirr JA(1), Martin CH(2).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Toxicology Department, University of California, Davis, CA.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology and Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 
University of California, Berkeley, CA.

Investigating closely related species that rapidly evolved divergent feeding 
morphology is a powerful approach to identify genetic variation underlying 
variation in complex traits. This can also lead to the discovery of novel 
candidate genes influencing natural and clinical variation in human craniofacial 
phenotypes. We combined whole-genome resequencing of 258 individuals with 50 
transcriptomes to identify candidate cis-acting genetic variation underlying 
rapidly evolving craniofacial phenotypes within an adaptive radiation of 
Cyprinodon pupfishes. This radiation consists of a dietary generalist species 
and two derived trophic niche specialists-a molluscivore and a scale-eating 
species. Despite extensive morphological divergence, these species only diverged 
10 kya and produce fertile hybrids in the laboratory. Out of 9.3 million 
genome-wide SNPs and 80,012 structural variants, we found very few alleles fixed 
between species-only 157 SNPs and 87 deletions. Comparing gene expression across 
38 purebred F1 offspring sampled at three early developmental stages, we 
identified 17 fixed variants within 10 kb of 12 genes that were highly 
differentially expressed between species. By measuring allele-specific 
expression in F1 hybrids from multiple crosses, we found that the majority of 
expression divergence between species was explained by trans-regulatory 
mechanisms. We also found strong evidence for two cis-regulatory alleles 
affecting expression divergence of two genes with putative effects on skeletal 
development (dync2li1 and pycr3). These results suggest that SNPs and structural 
variants contribute to the evolution of novel traits and highlight the utility 
of the San Salvador Island pupfish system as an evolutionary model for 
craniofacial development.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa218
PMCID: PMC7826174
PMID: 32877534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1162. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3616-3631. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa145.

Scalable Empirical Mixture Models That Account for Across-Site Compositional 
Heterogeneity.

Schrempf D(1), Lartillot N(2), Szöllősi G(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Physics, Eötvös University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR 5558, CNRS, Université de 
Lyon, Villeurbanne, France.
(3)ELTE-MTA "Lendület" Evolutionary Genomics Research Group, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Evolutionary Systems Research Group, Centre for Ecological Research, 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Tihany, Hungary.

Biochemical demands constrain the range of amino acids acceptable at specific 
sites resulting in across-site compositional heterogeneity of the amino acid 
replacement process. Phylogenetic models that disregard this heterogeneity are 
prone to systematic errors, which can lead to severe long-branch attraction 
artifacts. State-of-the-art models accounting for across-site compositional 
heterogeneity include the CAT model, which is computationally expensive, and 
empirical distribution mixture models estimated via maximum likelihood (C10-C60 
models). Here, we present a new, scalable method EDCluster for finding empirical 
distribution mixture models involving a simple cluster analysis. The cluster 
analysis utilizes specific coordinate transformations which allow the detection 
of specialized amino acid distributions either from curated databases or from 
the alignment at hand. We apply EDCluster to the HOGENOM and HSSP databases in 
order to provide universal distribution mixture (UDM) models comprising up to 
4,096 components. Detailed analyses of the UDM models demonstrate the removal of 
various long-branch attraction artifacts and improved performance compared with 
the C10-C60 models. Ready-to-use implementations of the UDM models are provided 
for three established software packages (IQ-TREE, Phylobayes, and RevBayes).

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa145
PMCID: PMC7743758
PMID: 32877529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1163. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):16-30. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa216.

Eighteen Coral Genomes Reveal the Evolutionary Origin of Acropora Strategies to 
Accommodate Environmental Changes.

Shinzato C(1), Khalturin K(2), Inoue J(1)(2), Zayasu Y(2), Kanda M(3), Kawamitsu 
M(3), Yoshioka Y(1)(4), Yamashita H(5), Suzuki G(5), Satoh N(2).

Author information:
(1)Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, The University of Tokyo, Chiba, 
Japan.
(2)Marine Genomics Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate 
University, Okinawa, Japan.
(3)DNA Sequence Section (SQC), Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology 
Graduate University, Onna, Okinawa, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, 
Chiba, Japan.
(5)Research Center for Subtropical Fisheries, Seikai National Fisheries Research 
Institute, Japan Fisheries Research and Education Agency, Okinawa, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jul 29;38(8):3495.

The genus Acropora comprises the most diverse and abundant scleractinian corals 
(Anthozoa, Cnidaria) in coral reefs, the most diverse marine ecosystems on 
Earth. However, the genetic basis for the success and wide distribution of 
Acropora are unknown. Here, we sequenced complete genomes of 15 Acropora species 
and 3 other acroporid taxa belonging to the genera Montipora and Astreopora to 
examine genomic novelties that explain their evolutionary success. We 
successfully obtained reasonable draft genomes of all 18 species. Molecular 
dating indicates that the Acropora ancestor survived warm periods without sea 
ice from the mid or late Cretaceous to the Early Eocene and that diversification 
of Acropora may have been enhanced by subsequent cooling periods. In general, 
the scleractinian gene repertoire is highly conserved; however, coral- or 
cnidarian-specific possible stress response genes are tandemly duplicated in 
Acropora. Enzymes that cleave dimethlysulfonioproprionate into dimethyl sulfide, 
which promotes cloud formation and combats greenhouse gasses, are the most 
duplicated genes in the Acropora ancestor. These may have been acquired by 
horizontal gene transfer from algal symbionts belonging to the family 
Symbiodiniaceae, or from coccolithophores, suggesting that although functions of 
this enzyme in Acropora are unclear, Acropora may have survived warmer marine 
environments in the past by enhancing cloud formation. In addition, possible 
antimicrobial peptides and symbiosis-related genes are under positive selection 
in Acropora, perhaps enabling adaptation to diverse environments. Our results 
suggest unique Acropora adaptations to ancient, warm marine environments and 
provide insights into its capacity to adjust to rising seawater temperatures.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa216
PMCID: PMC7783167
PMID: 32877528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1164. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):4056. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa126.

New Insights and Consequences of the Transatlantic Slave Trade on African 
Ancestry in the Americas.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa126
PMCID: PMC8382891
PMID: 32875337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1165. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):368-379. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa211.

The Adaptive Potential of the Middle Domain of Yeast Hsp90.

Cote-Hammarlof PA(1), Fragata I(2), Flynn J(1), Mavor D(1), Zeldovich KB(1), 
Bank C(2)(3), Bolon DNA(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA.
(2)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
(3)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Bern, Switzerland.

The distribution of fitness effects (DFEs) of new mutations across different 
environments quantifies the potential for adaptation in a given environment and 
its cost in others. So far, results regarding the cost of adaptation across 
environments have been mixed, and most studies have sampled random mutations 
across different genes. Here, we quantify systematically how costs of adaptation 
vary along a large stretch of protein sequence by studying the distribution of 
fitness effects of the same ≈2,300 amino-acid changing mutations obtained from 
deep mutational scanning of 119 amino acids in the middle domain of the heat 
shock protein Hsp90 in five environments. This region is known to be important 
for client binding, stabilization of the Hsp90 dimer, stabilization of the 
N-terminal-Middle and Middle-C-terminal interdomains, and regulation of 
ATPase-chaperone activity. Interestingly, we find that fitness correlates well 
across diverse stressful environments, with the exception of one environment, 
diamide. Consistent with this result, we find little cost of adaptation; on 
average only one in seven beneficial mutations is deleterious in another 
environment. We identify a hotspot of beneficial mutations in a region of the 
protein that is located within an allosteric center. The identified protein 
regions that are enriched in beneficial, deleterious, and costly mutations 
coincide with residues that are involved in the stabilization of Hsp90 
interdomains and stabilization of client-binding interfaces, or residues that 
are involved in ATPase-chaperone activity of Hsp90. Thus, our study yields 
information regarding the role and adaptive potential of a protein sequence that 
complements and extends known structural information.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa211
PMCID: PMC7826181
PMID: 32871012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1166. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):31-47. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa217.

Embryo-Like Features in Developing Bacillus subtilis Biofilms.

Futo M(1), Opašić L(1)(2), Koska S(1), Čorak N(1), Široki T(3), Ravikumar V(4), 
Thorsell A(5), Lenuzzi M(1)(6), Kifer D(7), Domazet-Lošo M(3), Vlahoviček 
K(8)(9), Mijakovic I(4)(10), Domazet-Lošo T(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics, Division of Molecular Biology, Ruđer 
Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Department for Evolutionary Theory, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Biology, Plön, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, University of Zagreb, 
Zagreb, Croatia.
(4)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.
(5)Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(6)Department of Evolutionary Biology, Max Planck Institute for Developmental 
Biology, Tübingen, Germany.
(7)Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(8)Bioinformatics Group, Division of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of 
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(9)School of Biosciences, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.
(10)Systems and Synthetic Biology Division, Department of Biology and Biological 
Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(11)Catholic University of Croatia, Zagreb, Croatia.

Correspondence between evolution and development has been discussed for more 
than two centuries. Recent work reveals that phylogeny-ontogeny correlations are 
indeed present in developmental transcriptomes of eukaryotic clades with complex 
multicellularity. Nevertheless, it has been largely ignored that the pervasive 
presence of phylogeny-ontogeny correlations is a hallmark of development in 
eukaryotes. This perspective opens a possibility to look for similar 
parallelisms in biological settings where developmental logic and multicellular 
complexity are more obscure. For instance, it has been increasingly recognized 
that multicellular behavior underlies biofilm formation in bacteria. However, it 
remains unclear whether bacterial biofilm growth shares some basic principles 
with development in complex eukaryotes. Here we show that the ontogeny of 
growing Bacillus subtilis biofilms recapitulates phylogeny at the expression 
level. Using time-resolved transcriptome and proteome profiles, we found that 
biofilm ontogeny correlates with the evolutionary measures, in a way that 
evolutionary younger and more diverged genes were increasingly expressed toward 
later timepoints of biofilm growth. Molecular and morphological signatures also 
revealed that biofilm growth is highly regulated and organized into discrete 
ontogenetic stages, analogous to those of eukaryotic embryos. Together, this 
suggests that biofilm formation in Bacillus is a bona fide developmental process 
comparable to organismal development in animals, plants, and fungi. Given that 
most cells on Earth reside in the form of biofilms and that biofilms represent 
the oldest known fossils, we anticipate that the widely adopted vision of the 
first life as a single-cell and free-living organism needs rethinking.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa217
PMCID: PMC7783165
PMID: 32871001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1167. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Mar 9;38(3):761-776. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa215.

Exploring Protein Space: From Hydrolase to Ligase by Substitution.

Hecht N(1), Monteil CL(2), Perrière G(2), Vishkautzan M(1)(3), Gur E(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 
Israel.
(2)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive, Université Claude Bernard - 
Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France.
(3)The National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Ben-Gurion University 
of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.

The understanding of how proteins evolve to perform novel functions has long 
been sought by biologists. In this regard, two homologous bacterial enzymes, 
PafA and Dop, pose an insightful case study, as both rely on similar mechanistic 
properties, yet catalyze different reactions. PafA conjugates a small protein 
tag to target proteins, whereas Dop removes the tag by hydrolysis. Given that 
both enzymes present a similar fold and high sequence similarity, we sought to 
identify the differences in the amino acid sequence and folding responsible for 
each distinct activity. We tackled this question using analysis of 
sequence-function relationships, and identified a set of uniquely conserved 
residues in each enzyme. Reciprocal mutagenesis of the hydrolase, Dop, 
completely abolished the native activity, at the same time yielding a 
catalytically active ligase. Based on the available Dop and PafA crystal 
structures, this change of activity required a conformational change of a 
critical loop at the vicinity of the active site. We identified the conserved 
positions essential for stabilization of the alternative loop conformation, and 
tracked alternative mutational pathways that lead to a change in activity. 
Remarkably, all these pathways were combined in the evolution of PafA and Dop, 
despite their redundant effect on activity. Overall, we identified the residues 
and structural elements in PafA and Dop responsible for their activity 
differences. This analysis delineated, in molecular terms, the changes required 
for the emergence of a new catalytic function from a preexisting one.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa215
PMCID: PMC7947786
PMID: 32870983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1168. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):263-273. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa213.

Genomic Consequences of Long-Term Population Decline in Brown Eared Pheasant.

Wang P(1)(2)(3), Burley JT(4), Liu Y(5), Chang J(6), Chen D(1), Lu Q(1), Li 
SH(7), Zhou X(2), Edwards S(3), Zhang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity Science and Ecological 
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology/Museum of Comparative 
Zoology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology/Institute at Brown for 
Environment and Society, Brown University, Providence, RI.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Ecology, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese 
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, China.
(7)School of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan, 
China.

Population genetic theory and empirical evidence indicate that deleterious 
alleles can be purged in small populations. However, this viewpoint remains 
controversial. It is unclear whether natural selection is powerful enough to 
purge deleterious mutations when wild populations continue to decline. Pheasants 
are terrestrial birds facing a long-term risk of extinction as a result of 
anthropogenic perturbations and exploitation. Nevertheless, there are scant 
genomics resources available for conservation management and planning. Here, we 
analyzed comparative population genomic data for the three extant isolated 
populations of Brown eared pheasant (Crossoptilon mantchuricum) in China. We 
showed that C. mantchuricum has low genome-wide diversity and a contracting 
effective population size because of persistent declines over the past 
100,000 years. We compared genome-wide variation in C. mantchuricum with that of 
its closely related sister species, the Blue eared pheasant (C. auritum) for 
which the conservation concern is low. There were detrimental genetic 
consequences across all C. mantchuricum genomes including extended runs of 
homozygous sequences, slow rates of linkage disequilibrium decay, excessive 
loss-of-function mutations, and loss of adaptive genetic diversity at the major 
histocompatibility complex region. To the best of our knowledge, this study is 
the first to perform a comprehensive conservation genomic analysis on this 
threatened pheasant species. Moreover, we demonstrated that natural selection 
may not suffice to purge deleterious mutations in wild populations undergoing 
long-term decline. The findings of this study could facilitate conservation 
planning for threatened species and help recover their population size.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa213
PMCID: PMC7783171
PMID: 32853368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1169. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):380-392. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa212.

Recapitulating Evolutionary Divergence in a Single Cis-Regulatory Element Is 
Sufficient to Cause Expression Changes of the Lens Gene Tdrd7.

Roscito JG(1)(2)(3), Subramanian K(1)(3), Naumann R(1), Sarov M(1), Shevchenko 
A(1), Bogdanova A(1), Kurth T(4), Foerster L(1)(2)(3), Kreysing M(1)(3)(5), 
Hiller M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, 
Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Center for Systems Biology, Dresden, Germany.
(4)Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering, Technology Platform, TU, 
Dresden, Germany.
(5)Center of Excellence, Physics of Life, Technical University, Dresden, 
Germany.

Mutations in cis-regulatory elements play important roles for phenotypic changes 
during evolution. Eye degeneration in the blind mole rat (BMR; Nannospalax 
galili) and other subterranean mammals is significantly associated with 
widespread divergence of eye regulatory elements, but the effect of these 
regulatory mutations on eye development and function has not been explored. 
Here, we investigate the effect of mutations observed in the BMR sequence of a 
conserved noncoding element upstream of Tdrd7, a pleiotropic gene required for 
lens development and spermatogenesis. We first show that this conserved element 
is a transcriptional repressor in lens cells and that the BMR sequence partially 
lost repressor activity. Next, we recapitulated evolutionary changes in this 
element by precisely replacing the endogenous regulatory element in a mouse line 
by the orthologous BMR sequence with CRISPR-Cas9. Strikingly, this repressor 
replacement caused a more than 2-fold upregulation of Tdrd7 in the developing 
lens; however, increased mRNA level does not result in a corresponding increase 
in TDRD7 protein nor an obvious lens phenotype, possibly explained by buffering 
at the posttranscriptional level. Our results are consistent with eye 
degeneration in subterranean mammals having a polygenic basis where many 
small-effect mutations in different eye-regulatory elements collectively 
contribute to phenotypic differences.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa212
PMCID: PMC7826196
PMID: 32853335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1170. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):358-367. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa208.

Experimental Evolution Reveals a Genetic Basis for Membrane-Associated Virus 
Release.

Bou JV(1), Sanjuán R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas-Universitat de València, Paterna, València, Spain.

Many animal viruses replicate and are released from cells in close association 
to membranes. However, whether this is a passive process or is controlled by the 
virus remains poorly understood. Importantly, the genetic basis and evolvability 
of membrane-associated viral shedding have not been investigated. To address 
this, we performed a directed evolution experiment using coxsackievirus B3, a 
model enterovirus, in which we repeatedly selected the free-virion or the 
fast-sedimenting membrane-associated viral subpopulations. The virus responded 
to this selection regime by reproducibly fixing a series of mutations that 
altered the extent of membrane-associated viral shedding, as revealed by 
full-genome ultra-deep sequencing. Specifically, using site-directed 
mutagenesis, we showed that substitution N63H in the viral capsid protein VP3 
reduced the ratio of membrane-associated to free viral particles by 2 orders of 
magnitude. These findings open new avenues for understanding the mechanisms and 
implications of membrane-associated viral transmission.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa208
PMCID: PMC7826177
PMID: 32810259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1171. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):181-191. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa200.

Are Nonsynonymous Transversions Generally More Deleterious than Nonsynonymous 
Transitions?

Zou Z(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.

It has been suggested that, due to the structure of the genetic code, 
nonsynonymous transitions are less likely than transversions to cause radical 
changes in amino acid physicochemical properties so are on average less 
deleterious. This view was supported by some but not all mutagenesis 
experiments. Because laboratory measures of fitness effects have limited 
sensitivities and relative frequencies of different mutations in mutagenesis 
studies may not match those in nature, we here revisit this issue using 
comparative genomics. We extend the standard codon model of sequence evolution 
by adding the parameter η that quantifies the ratio of the fixation probability 
of transitional nonsynonymous mutations to that of transversional nonsynonymous 
mutations. We then estimate η from the concatenated alignment of all 
protein-coding DNA sequences of two closely related genomes. Surprisingly, η 
ranges from 0.13 to 2.0 across 90 species pairs sampled from the tree of life, 
with 51 incidences of η < 1 and 30 incidences of η >1 that are statistically 
significant. Hence, whether nonsynonymous transversions are overall more 
deleterious than nonsynonymous transitions is species-dependent. Because the 
corresponding groups of amino acid replacements differ between nonsynonymous 
transitions and transversions, η is influenced by the relative exchangeabilities 
of amino acid pairs. Indeed, an extensive search reveals that the large 
variation in η is primarily explainable by the recently reported among-species 
disparity in amino acid exchangeabilities. These findings demonstrate that 
genome-wide nucleotide substitution patterns in coding sequences have 
species-specific features and are more variable among evolutionary lineages than 
are currently thought.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
American Medical Informatics Association.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa200
PMCID: PMC7783172
PMID: 32805043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1172. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):2-15. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa209.

Life and Death of Selfish Genes: Comparative Genomics Reveals the Dynamic 
Evolution of Cytoplasmic Incompatibility.

Martinez J(1)(2), Klasson L(3), Welch JJ(1), Jiggins FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Molecular Evolution, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Cytoplasmic incompatibility is a selfish reproductive manipulation induced by 
the endosymbiont Wolbachia in arthropods. In males Wolbachia modifies sperm, 
leading to embryonic mortality in crosses with Wolbachia-free females. In 
females, Wolbachia rescues the cross and allows development to proceed normally. 
This provides a reproductive advantage to infected females, allowing the 
maternally transmitted symbiont to spread rapidly through host populations. We 
identified homologs of the genes underlying this phenotype, cifA and cifB, in 52 
of 71 new and published Wolbachia genome sequences. They are strongly associated 
with cytoplasmic incompatibility. There are up to seven copies of the genes in 
each genome, and phylogenetic analysis shows that Wolbachia frequently acquires 
new copies due to pervasive horizontal transfer between strains. In many cases, 
the genes have subsequently acquired loss-of-function mutations to become 
pseudogenes. As predicted by theory, this tends to occur first in cifB, whose 
sole function is to modify sperm, and then in cifA, which is required to rescue 
the cross in females. Although cif genes recombine, recombination is largely 
restricted to closely related homologs. This is predicted under a model of 
coevolution between sperm modification and embryonic rescue, where recombination 
between distantly related pairs of genes would create a self-incompatible 
strain. Together, these patterns of gene gain, loss, and recombination support 
evolutionary models of cytoplasmic incompatibility.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa209
PMCID: PMC7783169
PMID: 32797213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1173. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):244-262. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa210.

Effective Population Size Predicts Local Rates but Not Local Mitigation of 
Read-through Errors.

Ho AT(1), Hurst LD(1).

Author information:
(1)Milner Centre for Evolution, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

In correctly predicting that selection efficiency is positively correlated with 
the effective population size (Ne), the nearly neutral theory provides a 
coherent understanding of between-species variation in numerous genomic 
parameters, including heritable error (germline mutation) rates. Does the same 
theory also explain variation in phenotypic error rates and in abundance of 
error mitigation mechanisms? Translational read-through provides a model to 
investigate both issues as it is common, mostly nonadaptive, and has good proxy 
for rate (TAA being the least leaky stop codon) and potential error mitigation 
via "fail-safe" 3' additional stop codons (ASCs). Prior theory of translational 
read-through has suggested that when population sizes are high, weak selection 
for local mitigation can be effective thus predicting a positive correlation 
between ASC enrichment and Ne. Contra to prediction, we find that ASC enrichment 
is not correlated with Ne. ASC enrichment, although highly phylogenetically 
patchy, is, however, more common both in unicellular species and in genes 
expressed in unicellular modes in multicellular species. By contrast, Ne does 
positively correlate with TAA enrichment. These results imply that local 
phenotypic error rates, not local mitigation rates, are consistent with a drift 
barrier/nearly neutral model.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa210
PMCID: PMC7783166
PMID: 32797190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1174. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 23;38(2):344-357. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa206.

Amoeba Genome Reveals Dominant Host Contribution to Plastid Endosymbiosis.

Lhee D(1), Lee J(2), Ettahi K(1), Cho CH(1), Ha JS(1), Chan YF(3), Zelzion U(3), 
Stephens TG(3), Price DC(4), Gabr A(5), Nowack ECM(6), Bhattacharya D(3), Yoon 
HS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea.
(2)Department of Oceanography, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Rutgers University, New 
Brunswick, NJ.
(4)Department of Entomology, Center for Vector Biology, Rutgers University, New 
Brunswick, NJ.
(5)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics Graduate Program, Rutgers University, New 
Brunswick, NJ.
(6)Institut für Mikrobielle Zellbiologie, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.

Eukaryotic photosynthetic organelles, plastids, are the powerhouses of many 
aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. The canonical plastid in algae and plants 
originated >1 Ga and therefore offers limited insights into the initial stages 
of organelle evolution. To address this issue, we focus here on the 
photosynthetic amoeba Paulinella micropora strain KR01 (hereafter, KR01) that 
underwent a more recent (∼124 Ma) primary endosymbiosis, resulting in a 
photosynthetic organelle termed the chromatophore. Analysis of genomic and 
transcriptomic data resulted in a high-quality draft assembly of size 707 Mb and 
32,361 predicted gene models. A total of 291 chromatophore-targeted proteins 
were predicted in silico, 208 of which comprise the ancestral organelle proteome 
in photosynthetic Paulinella species with functions, among others, in nucleotide 
metabolism and oxidative stress response. Gene coexpression analysis identified 
networks containing known high light stress response genes as well as a variety 
of genes of unknown function ("dark" genes). We characterized diurnally rhythmic 
genes in this species and found that over 49% are dark. It was recently 
hypothesized that large double-stranded DNA viruses may have driven gene 
transfer to the nucleus in Paulinella and facilitated endosymbiosis. Our 
analyses do not support this idea, but rather suggest that these viruses in the 
KR01 and closely related P. micropora MYN1 genomes resulted from a more recent 
invasion.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa206
PMCID: PMC7826189
PMID: 32790833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1175. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):229-243. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa207.

Spatial Transcriptomics of Nematodes Identifies Sperm Cells as a Source of 
Genomic Novelty and Rapid Evolution.

Rödelsperger C(1), Ebbing A(2), Sharma DR(1), Okumura M(3), Sommer RJ(1), 
Korswagen HC(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department for Integrative Evolutionary Biology, Max Planck Institute for 
Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Hubrecht Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Program of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for 
Life, Hiroshima University, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima, Japan.
(4)Developmental Biology, Department of Biology, Institute of Biodynamics and 
Biocomplexity, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Divergence of gene function and expression during development can give rise to 
phenotypic differences at the level of cells, tissues, organs, and ultimately 
whole organisms. To gain insights into the evolution of gene expression and 
novel genes at spatial resolution, we compared the spatially resolved 
transcriptomes of two distantly related nematodes, Caenorhabditis elegans and 
Pristionchus pacificus, that diverged 60-90 Ma. The spatial transcriptomes of 
adult worms show little evidence for strong conservation at the level of single 
genes. Instead, regional expression is largely driven by recent duplication and 
emergence of novel genes. Estimation of gene ages across anatomical structures 
revealed an enrichment of novel genes in sperm-related regions. This provides 
first evidence in nematodes for the "out of testis" hypothesis that has been 
previously postulated based on studies in Drosophila and mammals. "Out of 
testis" genes represent a mix of products of pervasive transcription as well as 
fast evolving members of ancient gene families. Strikingly, numerous novel genes 
have known functions during meiosis in Caenorhabditis elegans indicating that 
even universal processes such as meiosis may be targets of rapid evolution. Our 
study highlights the importance of novel genes in generating phenotypic 
diversity and explicitly characterizes gene origination in sperm-related 
regions. Furthermore, it proposes new functions for previously uncharacterized 
genes and establishes the spatial transcriptome of Pristionchus pacificus as a 
catalog for future studies on the evolution of gene expression and function.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa207
PMCID: PMC8480184
PMID: 32785688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1176. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):108-127. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa191.

An Unbiased Molecular Approach Using 3'-UTRs Resolves the Avian Family-Level 
Tree of Life.

Kuhl H(1)(2)(3), Frankl-Vilches C(1), Bakker A(1), Mayr G(4), Nikolaus G(1), 
Boerno ST(2), Klages S(2), Timmermann B(2), Gahr M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioural Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, 
Seewiesen, Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Sequencing Core Facility, 
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Ecophysiology and Aquaculture, Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater 
Ecology and Inland Fisheries, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Ornithological Section, Senckenberg Research Institute, Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany.

Presumably, due to a rapid early diversification, major parts of the 
higher-level phylogeny of birds are still resolved controversially in different 
analyses or are considered unresolvable. To address this problem, we produced an 
avian tree of life, which includes molecular sequences of one or several species 
of ∼90% of the currently recognized family-level taxa (429 species, 379 genera) 
including all 106 family-level taxa of the nonpasserines and 115 of the 
passerines (Passeriformes). The unconstrained analyses of noncoding 3-prime 
untranslated region (3'-UTR) sequences and those of coding sequences yielded 
different trees. In contrast to the coding sequences, the 3'-UTR sequences 
resulted in a well-resolved and stable tree topology. The 3'-UTR contained, 
unexpectedly, transcription factor binding motifs that were specific for 
different higher-level taxa. In this tree, grebes and flamingos are the sister 
clade of all other Neoaves, which are subdivided into five major clades. All 
nonpasserine taxa were placed with robust statistical support including the 
long-time enigmatic hoatzin (Opisthocomiformes), which was found being the 
sister taxon of the Caprimulgiformes. The comparatively late radiation of 
family-level clades of the songbirds (oscine Passeriformes) contrasts with the 
attenuated diversification of nonpasseriform taxa since the early Miocene. This 
correlates with the evolution of vocal production learning, an important 
speciation factor, which is ancestral for songbirds and evolved convergent only 
in hummingbirds and parrots. As 3'-UTR-based phylotranscriptomics resolved the 
avian family-level tree of life, we suggest that this procedure will also 
resolve the all-species avian tree of life.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa191
PMCID: PMC7783168
PMID: 32781465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1177. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):201-214. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa202.

Substitutions at Nonconserved Rheostat Positions Modulate Function by Rewiring 
Long-Range, Dynamic Interactions.

Campitelli P(1), Swint-Kruse L(2), Ozkan SB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, Center for Biological Physics, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS.

Amino acid substitutions at nonconserved protein positions can have noncanonical 
and "long-distance" outcomes on protein function. Such outcomes might arise from 
changes in the internal protein communication network, which is often 
accompanied by changes in structural flexibility. To test this, we calculated 
flexibilities and dynamic coupling for positions in the linker region of the 
lactose repressor protein. This region contains nonconserved positions for which 
substitutions alter DNA-binding affinity. We first chose to study 11 
substitutions at position 52. In computations, substitutions showed long-range 
effects on flexibilities of DNA-binding positions, and the degree of flexibility 
change correlated with experimentally measured changes in DNA binding. 
Substitutions also altered dynamic coupling to DNA-binding positions in a manner 
that captured other experimentally determined functional changes. Next, we 
broadened calculations to consider the dynamic coupling between 17 linker 
positions and the DNA-binding domain. Experimentally, these linker positions 
exhibited a wide range of substitution outcomes: Four conserved positions 
tolerated hardly any substitutions ("toggle"), ten nonconserved positions showed 
progressive changes from a range of substitutions ("rheostat"), and three 
nonconserved positions tolerated almost all substitutions ("neutral"). In 
computations with wild-type lactose repressor protein, the dynamic couplings 
between the DNA-binding domain and these linker positions showed varied degrees 
of asymmetry that correlated with the observed toggle/rheostat/neutral 
substitution outcomes. Thus, we propose that long-range and noncanonical 
substitutions outcomes at nonconserved positions arise from rewiring long-range 
communication among functionally important positions. Such calculations might 
enable predictions for substitution outcomes at a range of nonconserved 
positions.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa202
PMCID: PMC7783170
PMID: 32780837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1178. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):318-328. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa204.

Unsupervised Inference of Protein Fitness Landscape from Deep Mutational Scan.

Fernandez-de-Cossio-Diaz J(1)(2), Uguzzoni G(3), Pagnani A(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Systems Biology Department, Center of Molecular Immunology, Havana, Cuba.
(2)Laboratory of Physics of the Ecole Normale Superieure, CNRS UMR 8023 & PSL 
Research, Paris, France.
(3)Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy.
(4)Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine, IRCCS Candiolo, Candiolo, TO, Italy.
(5)INFN, Sezione di Torino, Torino, Italy.

The recent technological advances underlying the screening of large 
combinatorial libraries in high-throughput mutational scans deepen our 
understanding of adaptive protein evolution and boost its applications in 
protein design. Nevertheless, the large number of possible genotypes requires 
suitable computational methods for data analysis, the prediction of mutational 
effects, and the generation of optimized sequences. We describe a computational 
method that, trained on sequencing samples from multiple rounds of a screening 
experiment, provides a model of the genotype-fitness relationship. We tested the 
method on five large-scale mutational scans, yielding accurate predictions of 
the mutational effects on fitness. The inferred fitness landscape is robust to 
experimental and sampling noise and exhibits high generalization power in terms 
of broader sequence space exploration and higher fitness variant predictions. We 
investigate the role of epistasis and show that the inferred model provides 
structural information about the 3D contacts in the molecular fold.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa204
PMCID: PMC7783173
PMID: 32770229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1179. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):215-228. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa203.

Monophyletic Origin and Divergent Evolution of Animal Telomerase RNA.

Logeswaran D(1), Li Y(1), Podlevsky JD(1), Chen JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.

Telomerase RNA (TR) is a noncoding RNA essential for the function of telomerase 
ribonucleoprotein. TRs from vertebrates, fungi, ciliates, and plants exhibit 
extreme diversity in size, sequence, secondary structure, and biogenesis 
pathway. However, the evolutionary pathways leading to such unusual diversity 
among eukaryotic kingdoms remain elusive. Within the metazoan kingdom, the study 
of TR has been limited to vertebrates and echinoderms. To understand the origin 
and evolution of TR across the animal kingdom, we employed a phylogeny-guided, 
structure-based bioinformatics approach to identify 82 novel TRs from eight 
previously unexplored metazoan phyla, including the basal-branching sponges. 
Synthetic TRs from two representative species, a hemichordate and a mollusk, 
reconstitute active telomerase in vitro with their corresponding telomerase 
reverse transcriptase components, confirming that they are authentic TRs. 
Comparative analysis shows that three functional domains, template-pseudoknot 
(T-PK), CR4/5, and box H/ACA, are conserved between vertebrate and the basal 
metazoan lineages, indicating a monophyletic origin of the animal TRs with a 
snoRNA-related biogenesis mechanism. Nonetheless, TRs along separate animal 
lineages evolved with divergent structural elements in the T-PK and CR4/5 
domains. For example, TRs from echinoderms and protostomes lack the canonical 
CR4/5 and have independently evolved functionally equivalent domains with 
different secondary structures. In the T-PK domain, a P1.1 stem common in most 
metazoan clades defines the template boundary, which is replaced by a P1-defined 
boundary in vertebrates. This study provides unprecedented insight into the 
divergent evolution of detailed TR secondary structures across broad metazoan 
lineages, revealing ancestral and later-diversified elements.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa203
PMCID: PMC8480181
PMID: 32770221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1180. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):168-180. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa199.

The Genomic Selfing Syndrome Accompanies the Evolutionary Breakdown of 
Heterostyly.

Wang XJ(1)(2)(3), Barrett SCH(4), Zhong L(1)(3), Wu ZK(5), Li DZ(1)(2), Wang 
H(1), Zhou W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory for Plant Diversity and Biogeography of East Asia, Kunming 
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)Plant Germplasm and Genomics Center, Germplasm Bank of Wild Species, Kunming 
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Guizhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Guiyang, Guizhou, China.

The evolutionary transition from outcrossing to selfing can have important 
genomic consequences. Decreased effective population size and the reduced 
efficacy of selection are predicted to play an important role in the molecular 
evolution of the genomes of selfing species. We investigated evidence for 
molecular signatures of the genomic selfing syndrome using 66 species of Primula 
including distylous (outcrossing) and derived homostylous (selfing) taxa. We 
complemented our comparative analysis with a microevolutionary study of 
P. chungensis, which is polymorphic for mating system and consists of both 
distylous and homostylous populations. We generated chloroplast and nuclear 
genomic data sets for distylous, homostylous, and distylous-homostylous species 
and identified patterns of nonsynonymous to synonymous divergence (dN/dS) and 
polymorphism (πN/πS) in species or lineages with contrasting mating systems. Our 
analysis of coding sequence divergence and polymorphism detected strongly 
reduced genetic diversity and heterozygosity, decreased efficacy of purifying 
selection, purging of large-effect deleterious mutations, and lower rates of 
adaptive evolution in samples from homostylous compared with distylous 
populations, consistent with theoretical expectations of the genomic selfing 
syndrome. Our results demonstrate that self-fertilization is a major driver of 
molecular evolutionary processes with genomic signatures of selfing evident in 
both old and relatively young homostylous populations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa199
PMCID: PMC7782863
PMID: 32761213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1181. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):192-200. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa201.

When Sex Chromosomes Recombine Only in the Heterogametic Sex: Heterochiasmy and 
Heterogamety in Hyla Tree Frogs.

Dufresnes C(1)(2), Brelsford A(3), Baier F(4), Perrin N(2).

Author information:
(1)LASER, College of Biology and the Environment, Nanjing Forestry University, 
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Organismal Biology, University of 
California, Riverside, Riverside, CA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Organismic and 
Evolutionary Biology, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.

Sex chromosomes are classically predicted to stop recombining in the 
heterogametic sex, thereby enforcing linkage between sex-determining (SD) and 
sex-antagonistic (SA) genes. With the same rationale, a pre-existing sex 
asymmetry in recombination is expected to affect the evolution of heterogamety, 
for example, a low rate of male recombination might favor transitions to XY 
systems, by generating immediate linkage between SD and SA genes. Furthermore, 
the accumulation of deleterious mutations on nonrecombining Y chromosomes should 
favor XY-to-XY transitions (which discard the decayed Y), but disfavor XY-to-ZW 
transitions (which fix the decayed Y as an autosome). Like many anuran 
amphibians, Hyla tree frogs have been shown to display drastic heterochiasmy 
(males only recombine at chromosome tips) and are typically XY, which seems to 
fit the above expectations. Instead, here we demonstrate that two species, H. 
sarda and H. savignyi, share a common ZW system since at least 11 Ma. 
Surprisingly, the typical pattern of restricted male recombination has been 
maintained since then, despite female heterogamety. Hence, sex chromosomes 
recombine freely in ZW females, not in ZZ males. This suggests that 
heterochiasmy does not constrain heterogamety (and vice versa), and that the 
role of SA genes in the evolution of sex chromosomes might have been 
overemphasized.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa201
PMCID: PMC7782862
PMID: 32761205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1182. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3601-3615. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa197.

Evolutionary History of Major Chemosensory Gene Families across Panarthropoda.

Vizueta J(1), Escuer P(1), Frías-López C(1), Guirao-Rico S(2), Hering L(3), 
Mayer G(3), Rozas J(1), Sánchez-Gracia A(1).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística and Institut de Recerca 
de la Biodiversitat (IRBio), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Zoology, Institute of Biology, University of Kassel, Kassel, 
Germany.

Chemosensory perception is a fundamental biological process of particular 
relevance in basic and applied arthropod research. However, apart from insects, 
there is little knowledge of specific molecules involved in this system, which 
is restricted to a few taxa with uneven phylogenetic sampling across lineages. 
From an evolutionary perspective, onychophorans (velvet worms) and tardigrades 
(water bears) are of special interest since they represent the closest living 
relatives of arthropods, altogether comprising the Panarthropoda. To get 
insights into the evolutionary origin and diversification of the chemosensory 
gene repertoire in panarthropods, we sequenced the antenna- and head-specific 
transcriptomes of the velvet worm Euperipatoides rowelli and analyzed members of 
all major chemosensory families in representative genomes of onychophorans, 
tardigrades, and arthropods. Our results suggest that the NPC2 gene family was 
the only family encoding soluble proteins in the panarthropod ancestor and that 
onychophorans might have lost many arthropod-like chemoreceptors, including the 
highly conserved IR25a receptor of protostomes. On the other hand, the 
eutardigrade genomes lack genes encoding the DEG-ENaC and CD36-sensory neuron 
membrane proteins, the chemosensory members of which have been retained in 
arthropods; these losses might be related to lineage-specific adaptive 
strategies of tardigrades to survive extreme environmental conditions. Although 
the results of this study need to be further substantiated by an increased taxon 
sampling, our findings shed light on the diversification of chemosensory gene 
families in Panarthropoda and contribute to a better understanding of the 
evolution of animal chemical senses.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa197
PMID: 32750126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1183. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):152-167. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa198.

Divergent Evolution of a Protein-Protein Interaction Revealed through Ancestral 
Sequence Reconstruction and Resurrection.

Laursen L(1), Čalyševa J(2)(3), Gibson TJ(2), Jemth P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Faculty of Biosciences, Collaboration for Joint PhD Degree between EMBL and 
Heidelberg University.

The postsynaptic density extends across the postsynaptic dendritic spine with 
discs large (DLG) as the most abundant scaffolding protein. DLG dynamically 
alters the structure of the postsynaptic density, thus controlling the function 
and distribution of specific receptors at the synapse. DLG contains three PDZ 
domains and one important interaction governing postsynaptic architecture is 
that between the PDZ3 domain from DLG and a protein called cysteine-rich 
interactor of PDZ3 (CRIPT). However, little is known regarding functional 
evolution of the PDZ3:CRIPT interaction. Here, we subjected PDZ3 and CRIPT to 
ancestral sequence reconstruction, resurrection, and biophysical experiments. We 
show that the PDZ3:CRIPT interaction is an ancient interaction, which was likely 
present in the last common ancestor of Eukaryotes, and that high affinity is 
maintained in most extant animal phyla. However, affinity is low in nematodes 
and insects, raising questions about the physiological function of the 
interaction in species from these animal groups. Our findings demonstrate how an 
apparently established protein-protein interaction involved in cellular 
scaffolding in bilaterians can suddenly be subject to dynamic evolution 
including possible loss of function.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa198
PMCID: PMC7782867
PMID: 32750125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1184. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):142-151. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa196.

Relevance of Higher-Order Epistasis in Drug Resistance.

Lozovsky ER(1), Daniels RF(2), Heffernan GD(3), Jacobus DP(3), Hartl DL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
(2)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, MA.
(3)Jacobus Pharmaceutical Company, Inc., Princeton, NJ.

We studied five chemically distinct but related 1,3,5-triazine antifolates with 
regard to their effects on growth of a set of mutants in dihydrofolate 
reductase. The mutants comprise a combinatorially complete data set of all 16 
possible combinations of four amino acid replacements associated with resistance 
to pyrimethamine in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Pyrimethamine 
was a mainstay medication for malaria for many years, and it is still in use in 
intermittent treatment during pregnancy or as a partner drug in artemisinin 
combination therapy. Our goal was to investigate the extent to which the alleles 
yield similar adaptive topographies and patterns of epistasis across chemically 
related drugs. We find that the adaptive topographies are indeed similar with 
the same or closely related alleles being fixed in computer simulations of 
stepwise evolution. For all but one of the drugs the topography features at 
least one suboptimal fitness peak. Our data are consistent with earlier results 
indicating that third order and higher epistatic interactions appear to 
contribute only modestly to the overall adaptive topography, and they are 
largely conserved. In regard to drug development, our data suggest that 
higher-order interactions are likely to be of little value as an advisory tool 
in the choice of lead compounds.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa196
PMCID: PMC7782864
PMID: 32745183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1185. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):307-317. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa193.

Additive Uncorrelated Relaxed Clock Models for the Dating of Genomic 
Epidemiology Phylogenies.

Didelot X(1)(2), Siveroni I(3), Volz EM(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, School of Public Health, 
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Phylogenetic dating is one of the most powerful and commonly used methods of 
drawing epidemiological interpretations from pathogen genomic data. Building 
such trees requires considering a molecular clock model which represents the 
rate at which substitutions accumulate on genomes. When the molecular clock rate 
is constant throughout the tree then the clock is said to be strict, but this is 
often not an acceptable assumption. Alternatively, relaxed clock models consider 
variations in the clock rate, often based on a distribution of rates for each 
branch. However, we show here that the distributions of rates across branches in 
commonly used relaxed clock models are incompatible with the biological 
expectation that the sum of the numbers of substitutions on two neighboring 
branches should be distributed as the substitution number on a single branch of 
equivalent length. We call this expectation the additivity property. We further 
show how assumptions of commonly used relaxed clock models can lead to estimates 
of evolutionary rates and dates with low precision and biased confidence 
intervals. We therefore propose a new additive relaxed clock model where the 
additivity property is satisfied. We illustrate the use of our new additive 
relaxed clock model on a range of simulated and real data sets, and we show that 
using this new model leads to more accurate estimates of mean evolutionary rates 
and ancestral dates.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa193
PMCID: PMC8480190
PMID: 32722797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1186. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3563-3575. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa192.

Replacement and Parallel Simplification of Nonhomologous Proteinases Maintain 
Venom Phenotypes in Rear-Fanged Snakes.

Bayona-Serrano JD(1), Viala VL(1)(2), Rautsaw RM(3), Schramer TD(3), 
Barros-Carvalho GA(1), Nishiyama MY(1)(2), Freitas-de-Sousa LA(4), 
Moura-da-Silva AM(4)(5), Parkinson CL(3)(6), Grazziotin FG(7), 
Junqueira-de-Azevedo ILM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório Especial de Toxinologia Aplicada, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(2)Center of Toxins, Immune-Response and Cell Signaling (CeTICS), São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC.
(4)Laboratório de Imunopatologia, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Instituto de Pesquisa Clínica Carlos Borborema, Fundação de Medicina Tropical 
Dr. Heitor Vieira Dourado, Manaus, Brazil.
(6)Department of Forestry and Environmental Conservation, Clemson University, 
Clemson, SC.
(7)Laboratório de Coleções Zoológicas, Instituto Butantan, São Paulo, Brazil.

Novel phenotypes are commonly associated with gene duplications and 
neofunctionalization, less documented are the cases of phenotypic maintenance 
through the recruitment of novel genes. Proteolysis is the primary toxic 
character of many snake venoms, and ADAM metalloproteinases, named snake venom 
metalloproteinases (SVMPs), are largely recognized as the major effectors of 
this phenotype. However, by investigating original transcriptomes from 58 
species of advanced snakes (Caenophidia) across their phylogeny, we discovered 
that a different enzyme, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP), is actually the 
dominant venom component in three tribes (Tachymenini, Xenodontini, and 
Conophiini) of rear-fanged snakes (Dipsadidae). Proteomic and functional 
analyses of these venoms further indicate that MMPs are likely playing an 
"SVMP-like" function in the proteolytic phenotype. A detailed look into the 
venom-specific sequences revealed a new highly expressed MMP subtype, named 
snake venom MMP (svMMP), which originated independently on at least three 
occasions from an endogenous MMP-9. We further show that by losing ancillary 
noncatalytic domains present in its ancestors, svMMPs followed an evolutionary 
path toward a simplified structure during their expansion in the genomes, thus 
paralleling what has been proposed for the evolution of their Viperidae 
counterparts, the SVMPs. Moreover, we inferred an inverse relationship between 
the expression of svMMPs and SVMPs along the evolutionary history of 
Xenodontinae, pointing out that one type of enzyme may be substituting for the 
other, whereas the general (metallo)proteolytic phenotype is maintained. These 
results provide rare evidence on how relevant phenotypic traits can be optimized 
via natural selection on nonhomologous genes, yielding alternate biochemical 
components.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa192
PMCID: PMC8525196
PMID: 32722789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1187. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3576-3600. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa194.

Human L1 Transposition Dynamics Unraveled with Functional Data Analysis.

Chen D(1), Cremona MA(2)(3), Qi Z(4), Mitra RD(4), Chiaromonte F(2)(5)(6), 
Makova KD(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Intercollege Graduate Degree Program in Genetics, The Huck Institutes of the 
Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(2)Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA.
(3)Department of Operations and Decision Systems, Université Laval, Québec, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Genetics and Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(5)EMbeDS, Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy.
(6)The Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Center for Medical Genomics, The 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(7)Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA.

Long INterspersed Elements-1 (L1s) constitute >17% of the human genome and still 
actively transpose in it. Characterizing L1 transposition across the genome is 
critical for understanding genome evolution and somatic mutations. However, to 
date, L1 insertion and fixation patterns have not been studied comprehensively. 
To fill this gap, we investigated three genome-wide data sets of L1s that 
integrated at different evolutionary times: 17,037 de novo L1s (from an L1 
insertion cell-line experiment conducted in-house), and 1,212 polymorphic and 
1,205 human-specific L1s (from public databases). We characterized 49 genomic 
features-proxying chromatin accessibility, transcriptional activity, 
replication, recombination, etc.-in the ±50 kb flanks of these elements. These 
features were contrasted between the three L1 data sets and L1-free regions 
using state-of-the-art Functional Data Analysis statistical methods, which treat 
high-resolution data as mathematical functions. Our results indicate that de 
novo, polymorphic, and human-specific L1s are surrounded by different genomic 
features acting at specific locations and scales. This led to an integrative 
model of L1 transposition, according to which L1s preferentially integrate into 
open-chromatin regions enriched in non-B DNA motifs, whereas they are fixed in 
regions largely free of purifying selection-depleted of genes and noncoding most 
conserved elements. Intriguingly, our results suggest that L1 insertions modify 
local genomic landscape by extending CpG methylation and increasing 
mononucleotide microsatellite density. Altogether, our findings substantially 
facilitate understanding of L1 integration and fixation preferences, pave the 
way for uncovering their role in aging and cancer, and inform their use as 
mutagenesis tools in genetic studies.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa194
PMCID: PMC7743743
PMID: 32722770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1188. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):96-107. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa190.

Evolutionary History of Endogenous Human Herpesvirus 6 Reflects Human Migration 
out of Africa.

Aswad A(1), Aimola G(1), Wight D(1), Roychoudhury P(2)(3), Zimmermann C(1), Hill 
J(2)(3)(4), Lassner D(5)(6), Xie H(2)(3), Huang ML(2)(3), Parrish NF(7), 
Schultheiss HP(6), Venturini C(8), Lager S(9)(10), Smith GCS(10), Charnock-Jones 
DS(10), Breuer J(8), Greninger AL(2)(3), Kaufer BB(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Virologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(3)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research 
Centre, Seattle, WA.
(4)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA.
(5)HighTech Center, Vinmec Hospital, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(6)Institut Kardiale Diagnostik und Therapie, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Genome Immunobiology RIKEN Hakubi Research Team, RIKEN Cluster for Pioneering 
Research, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(8)Division of Infection and Immunity, UCL Research Department of Infection, 
UCL, London, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Cambridge University, United 
Kingdom.

Human herpesvirus 6A and 6B (HHV-6) can integrate into the germline, and as a 
result, ∼70 million people harbor the genome of one of these viruses in every 
cell of their body. Until now, it has been largely unknown if 1) these 
integrations are ancient, 2) if they still occur, and 3) whether circulating 
virus strains differ from integrated ones. Here, we used next-generation 
sequencing and mining of public human genome data sets to generate the largest 
and most diverse collection of circulating and integrated HHV-6 genomes studied 
to date. In genomes of geographically dispersed, only distantly related people, 
we identified clades of integrated viruses that originated from a single 
ancestral event, confirming this with fluorescent in situ hybridization to 
directly observe the integration locus. In contrast to HHV-6B, circulating and 
integrated HHV-6A sequences form distinct clades, arguing against ongoing 
integration of circulating HHV-6A or "reactivation" of integrated HHV-6A. Taken 
together, our study provides the first comprehensive picture of the evolution of 
HHV-6, and reveals that integration of heritable HHV-6 has occurred since the 
time of, if not before, human migrations out of Africa.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa190
PMCID: PMC7782865
PMID: 32722766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1189. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):128-141. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa195.

Srag Regulates Autophagy via Integrating into a Preexisting Autophagy Pathway in 
Testis.

Cheng Y(1), Lai F(1), Wang X(1), Shang D(1), Zou J(1), Luo M(1), Xia X(1), Cheng 
H(1), Zhou R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan 
University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Spermatogenesis is an essential process for producing sperm cells. Reproductive 
strategy is successfully evolved for a species to adapt to a certain ecological 
system. However, roles of newly evolved genes in testis autophagy remain 
unclear. In this study, we found that a newly evolved gene srag (Sox9-regulated 
autophagy gene) plays an important role in promoting autophagy in testis in the 
lineage of the teleost Monopterus albus. The gene integrated into an interaction 
network through a two-way strategy of evolution, via Sox9-binding in its 
promoter and interaction with Becn1 in the coding region. Its promoter region 
evolved a cis element for binding of Sox9, a transcription factor for male sex 
determination. Both in vitro and in vivo analyses demonstrated that 
transcription factor Sox9 could bind to and activate the srag promoter. Its 
coding region acquired ability to interact with key autophagy initiation factor 
Becn1 via the conserved C-terminal, indicating that srag integrated into 
preexisting autophagy network. Moreover, we determined that Srag enhanced 
autophagy by interacting with Becn1. Notably, srag transgenic zebrafish revealed 
that Srag exerted the same function by enhancing autophagy through the 
Srag-Becn1 pathway. Thus, the new gene srag regulated autophagy in testis by 
integrated into preexisting autophagy network.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa195
PMCID: PMC7782868
PMID: 32722765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1190. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3525-3549. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa186.

Eukaryote-Conserved Methylarginine Is Absent in Diplomonads and Functionally 
Compensated in Giardia.

Emery-Corbin SJ(1)(2), Hamey JJ(3), Ansell BRE(1)(2), Balan B(1)(2)(4), Tichkule 
S(1)(2), Stroehlein AJ(4), Cooper C(5), McInerney BV(6), Hediyeh-Zadeh S(2)(7), 
Vuong D(8), Crombie A(8), Lacey E(8)(9), Davis MJ(2)(7), Wilkins MR(3), Bahlo 
M(1)(2), Svärd SG(10), Gasser RB(4), Jex AR(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 
of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(3)School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of 
Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
VIC, Australia.
(5)Central Analytical Research Facility (CARF), Institute for Future 
Environments, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(6)Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF), Macquarie University, North 
Ryde, NSW, Australia.
(7)Bioinformatics Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical 
Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(8)Microbial Screening Technologies, Smithfield, NSW, Australia.
(9)Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences, Faculty of Science, Macquarie 
University, North Ryde, NSW, Australia.
(10)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

Methylation is a common posttranslational modification of arginine and lysine in 
eukaryotic proteins. Methylproteomes are best characterized for higher 
eukaryotes, where they are functionally expanded and evolved complex regulation. 
However, this is not the case for protist species evolved from the earliest 
eukaryotic lineages. Here, we integrated bioinformatic, proteomic, and 
drug-screening data sets to comprehensively explore the methylproteome of 
Giardia duodenalis-a deeply branching parasitic protist. We demonstrate that 
Giardia and related diplomonads lack arginine-methyltransferases and have 
remodeled conserved RGG/RG motifs targeted by these enzymes. We also provide 
experimental evidence for methylarginine absence in proteomes of Giardia but 
readily detect methyllysine. We bioinformatically infer 11 
lysine-methyltransferases in Giardia, including highly diverged Su(var)3-9, 
Enhancer-of-zeste and Trithorax proteins with reduced domain architectures, and 
novel annotations demonstrating conserved methyllysine regulation of eukaryotic 
elongation factor 1 alpha. Using mass spectrometry, we identify more than 200 
methyllysine sites in Giardia, including in species-specific gene families 
involved in cytoskeletal regulation, enriched in coiled-coil features. Finally, 
we use known methylation inhibitors to show that methylation plays key roles in 
replication and cyst formation in this parasite. This study highlights reduced 
methylation enzymes, sites, and functions early in eukaryote evolution, 
including absent methylarginine networks in the Diplomonadida. These results 
challenge the view that arginine methylation is eukaryote conserved and 
demonstrate that functional compensation of methylarginine was possible 
preceding expansion and diversification of these key networks in higher 
eukaryotes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa186
PMCID: PMC7743719
PMID: 32702104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1191. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3550-3562. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa187.

Using GC Content to Compare Recombination Patterns on the Sex Chromosomes and 
Autosomes of the Guppy, Poecilia reticulata, and Its Close Outgroup Species.

Charlesworth D(1), Zhang Y(1), Bergero R(1), Graham C(2), Gardner J(1), Yong 
L(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University 
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter, Falmouth, 
Cornwall, United Kingdom.

Genetic and physical mapping of the guppy (Poecilia reticulata) have shown that 
recombination patterns differ greatly between males and females. Crossover 
events occur evenly across the chromosomes in females, but in male meiosis they 
are restricted to the tip furthest from the centromere of each chromosome, 
creating very high recombination rates per megabase, as in pseudoautosomal 
regions of mammalian sex chromosomes. We used GC content to indirectly infer 
recombination patterns on guppy chromosomes, based on evidence that 
recombination is associated with GC-biased gene conversion, so that genome 
regions with high recombination rates should be detectable by high GC content. 
We used intron sequences and third positions of codons to make comparisons 
between sequences that are matched, as far as possible, and are all probably 
under weak selection. Almost all guppy chromosomes, including the sex chromosome 
(LG12), have very high GC values near their assembly ends, suggesting high 
recombination rates due to strong crossover localization in male meiosis. Our 
test does not suggest that the guppy XY pair has stronger crossover localization 
than the autosomes, or than the homologous chromosome in the close relative, the 
platyfish (Xiphophorus maculatus). We therefore conclude that the guppy XY pair 
has not recently undergone an evolutionary change to a different recombination 
pattern, or reduced its crossover rate, but that the guppy evolved Y-linkage due 
to acquiring a male-determining factor that also conferred the male crossover 
pattern. We also identify the centromere ends of guppy chromosomes, which were 
not determined in the genome assembly.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa187
PMID: 32697821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1192. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2944-2954. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa140.

Khoe-San Genomes Reveal Unique Variation and Confirm the Deepest Population 
Divergence in Homo sapiens.

Schlebusch CM(1)(2)(3), Sjödin P(1), Breton G(1), Günther T(1), Naidoo 
T(1)(2)(3), Hollfelder N(1), Sjöstrand AE(1), Xu J(1), Gattepaille LM(1), 
Vicente M(1), Scofield DG(4)(5), Malmström H(1)(2), de Jongh M(6), Lombard M(2), 
Soodyall H(7)(8), Jakobsson M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Evolution, Department of Organismal Biology, Evolutionary Biology 
Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Palaeo-Research Institute, University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park, South 
Africa.
(3)SciLifeLab, Stockholm and Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Uppsala Multidisciplinary Center for Advanced Computational Science, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Department of Anthropology and Archaeology, University of South Africa, 
Pretoria, South Africa.
(7)Division of Human Genetics, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of the Witwatersrand and National Health Laboratory Service, 
Johannesburg, South Africa.
(8)Academy of Science of South Africa.

The southern African indigenous Khoe-San populations harbor the most divergent 
lineages of all living peoples. Exploring their genomes is key to understanding 
deep human history. We sequenced 25 full genomes from five Khoe-San populations, 
revealing many novel variants, that 25% of variants are unique to the Khoe-San, 
and that the Khoe-San group harbors the greatest level of diversity across the 
globe. In line with previous studies, we found several gene regions with extreme 
values in genome-wide scans for selection, potentially caused by natural 
selection in the lineage leading to Homo sapiens and more recent in time. These 
gene regions included immunity-, sperm-, brain-, diet-, and muscle-related 
genes. When accounting for recent admixture, all Khoe-San groups display genetic 
diversity approaching the levels in other African groups and a reduction in 
effective population size starting around 100,000 years ago. Hence, all human 
groups show a reduction in effective population size commencing around the time 
of the Out-of-Africa migrations, which coincides with changes in the 
paleoclimate records, changes that potentially impacted all humans at the time.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa140
PMCID: PMC7530619
PMID: 32697301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1193. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):67-83. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa188.

Evidence for Strong Mutation Bias toward, and Selection against, U Content in 
SARS-CoV-2: Implications for Vaccine Design.

Rice AM(1), Castillo Morales A(1), Ho AT(1), Mordstein C(1)(2), Mühlhausen S(1), 
Watson S(3), Cano L(2), Young B(1)(2), Kudla G(2), Hurst LD(1).

Author information:
(1)The Milner Centre for Evolution, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, 
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(2)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute for Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Oct 27;38(11):5210.

Large-scale re-engineering of synonymous sites is a promising strategy to 
generate vaccines either through synthesis of attenuated viruses or via 
codon-optimized genes in DNA vaccines. Attenuation typically relies on 
deoptimization of codon pairs and maximization of CpG dinucleotide frequencies. 
So as to formulate evolutionarily informed attenuation strategies that aim to 
force nucleotide usage against the direction favored by selection, here, we 
examine available whole-genome sequences of SARS-CoV-2 to infer patterns of 
mutation and selection on synonymous sites. Analysis of mutational profiles 
indicates a strong mutation bias toward U. In turn, analysis of observed 
synonymous site composition implicates selection against U. Accounting for 
dinucleotide effects reinforces this conclusion, observed UU content being a 
quarter of that expected under neutrality. Possible mechanisms of selection 
against U mutations include selection for higher expression, for high mRNA 
stability or lower immunogenicity of viral genes. Consistent with gene-specific 
selection against CpG dinucleotides, we observe systematic differences of CpG 
content between SARS-CoV-2 genes. We propose an evolutionarily informed approach 
to attenuation that, unusually, seeks to increase usage of the already most 
common synonymous codons. Comparable analysis of H1N1 and Ebola finds that GC3 
deviated from neutral equilibrium is not a universal feature, cautioning against 
generalization of results.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa188
PMCID: PMC7454790
PMID: 32687176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1194. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):58-66. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa184.

Simplification of Ribosomes in Bacteria with Tiny Genomes.

Nikolaeva DD(1)(2), Gelfand MS(2)(3), Garushyants SK(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Institute for Information Transmission Problems (Kharkevich Institute), 
Moscow, Russia.
(3)Center of Life Sciences, Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, 
Moscow, Russia.

The ribosome is an essential cellular machine performing protein biosynthesis. 
Its structure and composition are highly conserved in all species. However, some 
bacteria have been reported to have an incomplete set of ribosomal proteins. We 
have analyzed ribosomal protein composition in 214 small bacterial genomes 
(<1 Mb) and found that although the ribosome composition is fairly stable, some 
ribosomal proteins may be absent, especially in bacteria with dramatically 
reduced genomes. The protein composition of the large subunit is less conserved 
than that of the small subunit. We have identified the set of frequently lost 
ribosomal proteins and demonstrated that they tend to be positioned on the 
ribosome surface and have fewer contacts to other ribosome components. Moreover, 
some proteins are lost in an evolutionary correlated manner. The reduction of 
ribosomal RNA is also common, with deletions mostly occurring in free loops. 
Finally, the loss of the anti-Shine-Dalgarno sequence is associated with the 
loss of a higher number of ribosomal proteins.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa184
PMCID: PMC7782861
PMID: 32681797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1195. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3507-3524. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa185.

Evolutionary Genomics of Structural Variation in Asian Rice (Oryza sativa) 
Domestication.

Kou Y(1)(2), Liao Y(1), Toivainen T(1)(3), Lv Y(1), Tian X(4), Emerson JJ(1), 
Gaut BS(1), Zhou Y(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, UC Irvine, Irvine, CA.
(2)Laboratory of Subtropical Biodiversity, Jiangxi Agricultural University, 
Nanchang, China.
(3)Department of Agricultural Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Life Science and Technology, 
Xinjiang University, Urumqi, China.
(5)Genome Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural 
Genomics Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Shenzhen, China.

Structural variants (SVs) are a largely unstudied feature of plant genome 
evolution, despite the fact that SVs contribute substantially to phenotypes. In 
this study, we discovered SVs across a population sample of 347 high-coverage, 
resequenced genomes of Asian rice (Oryza sativa) and its wild ancestor 
(O. rufipogon). In addition to this short-read data set, we also inferred SVs 
from whole-genome assemblies and long-read data. Comparisons among data sets 
revealed different features of genome variability. For example, genome alignment 
identified a large (∼4.3 Mb) inversion in indica rice varieties relative to 
japonica varieties, and long-read analyses suggest that ∼9% of genes from the 
outgroup (O. longistaminata) are hemizygous. We focused, however, on the 
resequencing sample to investigate the population genomics of SVs. Clustering 
analyses with SVs recapitulated the rice cultivar groups that were also inferred 
from SNPs. However, the site-frequency spectrum of each SV type-which included 
inversions, duplications, deletions, translocations, and mobile element 
insertions-was skewed toward lower frequency variants than synonymous SNPs, 
suggesting that SVs may be predominantly deleterious. Among transposable 
elements, SINE and mariner insertions were found at especially low frequency. We 
also used SVs to study domestication by contrasting between rice and 
O. rufipogon. Cultivated genomes contained ∼25% more derived SVs and mobile 
element insertions than O. rufipogon, indicating that SVs contribute to the cost 
of domestication in rice. Peaks of SV divergence were enriched for known 
domestication genes, but we also detected hundreds of genes gained and lost 
during domestication, some of which were enriched for traits of agronomic 
interest.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa185
PMCID: PMC7743901
PMID: 32681796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1196. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3684-3698. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa176.

Inference of Chromosome-Length Haplotypes Using Genomic Data of Three or a Few 
More Single Gametes.

Li R(1)(2), Qu H(1), Chen J(1), Wang S(1), Chater JM(1), Zhang L(2), Wei 
J(1)(3), Zhang YM(4), Xu C(5), Zhong WD(6), Zhu J(7), Lu J(1)(6), Feng Y(1)(6), 
Chen W(7), Ma R(1)(8), Ferrante SP(1), Roose ML(1)(2), Jia Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, University of California, Riverside, 
Riverside, CA.
(2)Graduate Program in Genetics, Genomics, and Bioinformatics, University of 
California, Riverside, Riverside, CA.
(3)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, 
MI.
(4)Statistical Genomics Lab, College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong 
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(5)Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology, 
Co-Innovation Center for Modern Production Technology of Grain Crops, Key 
Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of Ministry of Education, Yangzhou 
University, Yangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Urology, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Clinical Molecular 
Medicine and Diagnostics, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, 
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Urology, Guizhou Provincial People's Hospital, Guizhou, China.
(8)Department of Mathematics, Bowdoin College, Brunswick, ME.

Compared with genomic data of individual markers, haplotype data provide higher 
resolution for DNA variants, advancing our knowledge in genetics and evolution. 
Although many computational and experimental phasing methods have been developed 
for analyzing diploid genomes, it remains challenging to reconstruct 
chromosome-scale haplotypes at low cost, which constrains the utility of this 
valuable genetic resource. Gamete cells, the natural packaging of haploid 
complements, are ideal materials for phasing entire chromosomes because the 
majority of the haplotypic allele combinations has been preserved. Therefore, 
compared with the current diploid-based phasing methods, using haploid genomic 
data of single gametes may substantially reduce the complexity in inferring the 
donor's chromosomal haplotypes. In this study, we developed the first 
easy-to-use R package, Hapi, for inferring chromosome-length haplotypes of 
individual diploid genomes with only a few gametes. Hapi outperformed other 
phasing methods when analyzing both simulated and real single gamete cell 
sequencing data sets. The results also suggested that chromosome-scale 
haplotypes may be inferred by using as few as three gametes, which has pushed 
the boundary to its possible limit. The single gamete cell sequencing technology 
allied with the cost-effective Hapi method will make large-scale haplotype-based 
genetic studies feasible and affordable, promoting the use of haplotype data in 
a wide range of research.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa176
PMCID: PMC7743722
PMID: 32668004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1197. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):48-57. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa174.

Spatiotemporal Genetic Diversity of Lions Reveals the Influence of Habitat 
Fragmentation across Africa.

Curry CJ(1)(2), Davis BW(3), Bertola LD(4), White PA(5), Murphy WJ(1)(3), Derr 
JN(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Program in Genetics, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
(3)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
(4)Department of Biology, City College of New York, New York, NY.
(5)Center for Tropical Research, Institute of the Environment and 
Sustainability, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.

Direct comparisons between historical and contemporary populations allow for 
detecting changes in genetic diversity through time and assessment of the impact 
of habitat fragmentation. Here, we determined the genetic architecture of both 
historical and modern lions to document changes in genetic diversity over the 
last century. We surveyed microsatellite and mitochondrial genome variation from 
143 high-quality museum specimens of known provenance, allowing us to directly 
compare this information with data from several recently published nuclear and 
mitochondrial studies. Our results provide evidence for male-mediated gene flow 
and recent isolation of local subpopulations, likely due to habitat 
fragmentation. Nuclear markers showed a significant decrease in genetic 
diversity from the historical (HE = 0.833) to the modern (HE = 0.796) 
populations, whereas mitochondrial genetic diversity was maintained (Hd = 0.98 
for both). Although the historical population appears to have been panmictic 
based on nDNA data, hierarchical structure analysis identified four tiers of 
genetic structure in modern populations and was able to detect most sampling 
locations. Mitogenome analyses identified four clusters: Southern, Mixed, 
Eastern, and Western and were consistent between modern and historically sampled 
haplotypes. Within the last century, habitat fragmentation caused lion 
subpopulations to become more geographically isolated as human expansion changed 
the African landscape. This resulted in an increase in fine-scale nuclear 
genetic structure and loss of genetic diversity as lion subpopulations became 
more differentiated, whereas mitochondrial structure and diversity were 
maintained over time.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa174
PMCID: PMC8480188
PMID: 32667997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1198. Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):290-306. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa179.

Multiple Merger Genealogies in Outbreaks of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Menardo F(1)(2), Gagneux S(1)(2), Freund F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Parasitology and Infection Biology, Swiss Tropical and 
Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Plant Biodiversity and Breeding Informatics, Institute of Plant 
Breeding, Seed Science and Population Genetics, University of Hohenheim, 
Stuttgart, Germany.

The Kingman coalescent and its developments are often considered among the most 
important advances in population genetics of the last decades. Demographic 
inference based on coalescent theory has been used to reconstruct the population 
dynamics and evolutionary history of several species, including Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (MTB), an important human pathogen causing tuberculosis. One key 
assumption of the Kingman coalescent is that the number of descendants of 
different individuals does not vary strongly, and violating this assumption 
could lead to severe biases caused by model misspecification. Individual 
lineages of MTB are expected to vary strongly in reproductive success because 1) 
MTB is potentially under constant selection due to the pressure of the host 
immune system and of antibiotic treatment, 2) MTB undergoes repeated population 
bottlenecks when it transmits from one host to the next, and 3) some hosts show 
much higher transmission rates compared with the average (superspreaders). Here, 
we used an approximate Bayesian computation approach to test whether 
multiple-merger coalescents (MMC), a class of models that allow for large 
variation in reproductive success among lineages, are more appropriate models to 
study MTB populations. We considered 11 publicly available whole-genome sequence 
data sets sampled from local MTB populations and outbreaks and found that MMC 
had a better fit compared with the Kingman coalescent for 10 of the 11 data 
sets. These results indicate that the null model for analyzing MTB outbreaks 
should be reassessed and that past findings based on the Kingman coalescent need 
to be revisited.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa179
PMCID: PMC8480183
PMID: 32667991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1199. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3232-3242. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa180.

Frequent Retroviral Gene Co-option during the Evolution of Vertebrates.

Wang J(1), Han GZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, College of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Endogenous retroviruses are ubiquitous in the vertebrate genomes. On occasion, 
hosts recruited retroviral genes to mediate their own biological functions, a 
process formally known as co-option or exaptation. Much remains unknown about 
the extent of retroviral gene co-option in vertebrates, although more than ten 
retroviral gene co-option events have been documented. Here, we use a 
phylogenomic approach to analyze more than 700 vertebrate genomes to uncover 
retroviral gene co-option taking place during the evolution of vertebrates. We 
identify a total of 177 independent retroviral gene co-option events in 
vertebrates, a majority of which have not been reported previously. Among these 
retroviral gene co-option events, 93 and 84 involve gag and env genes, 
respectively. More than 78.0% (138 out of 177) of retroviral gene co-option 
occurred within mammals. The gag and env co-option events share a generally 
similar temporal pattern with less frequent retroviral gene co-option identified 
in the deep branches, suggesting that retroviral gene co-option might have not 
been maintained for very long time periods. Moreover, we find co-opted 
retroviral genes are subject to different selection pressure, implying 
potentially diverse cellular functionality. Our study provides a comprehensive 
picture of co-opted retroviral genes during the evolution of vertebrates and has 
implications in understanding the ancient evolution of vertebrate-retrovirus 
interaction.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa180
PMID: 32667990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1200. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3672-3683. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa181.

Is Phylotranscriptomics as Reliable as Phylogenomics?

Cheon S(1), Zhang J(2), Park C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam National University, 
Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.

Phylogenomics, the study of phylogenetic relationships among taxa based on their 
genome sequences, has emerged as the preferred phylogenetic method because of 
the wealth of phylogenetic information contained in genome sequences. Genome 
sequencing, however, can be prohibitively expensive, especially for taxa with 
huge genomes and when many taxa need sequencing. Consequently, the less costly 
phylotranscriptomics has seen an increased use in recent years. 
Phylotranscriptomics reconstructs phylogenies using DNA sequences derived from 
transcriptomes, which are often orders of magnitude smaller than genomes. 
However, in the absence of corresponding genome sequences, comparative analyses 
of transcriptomes can be challenging and it is unclear whether 
phylotranscriptomics is as reliable as phylogenomics. Here, we respectively 
compare the phylogenomic and phylotranscriptomic trees of 22 mammals and 15 
plants that have both sequenced nuclear genomes and publicly available RNA 
sequencing data from multiple tissues. We found that phylotranscriptomic 
analysis can be sensitive to orthologous gene identification. When a rigorous 
method for identifying orthologs is employed, phylogenomic and 
phylotranscriptomic trees are virtually identical to each other, regardless of 
the tissue of origin of the transcriptomes and whether the same tissue is used 
across species. These findings validate phylotranscriptomics, brighten its 
prospect, and illustrate the criticality of reliable ortholog detection in such 
practices.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa181
PMCID: PMC7743905
PMID: 32658973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1201. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2989-3002. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa172.

Gene Loss Predictably Drives Evolutionary Adaptation.

Helsen J(1)(2)(3), Voordeckers K(2)(3), Vanderwaeren L(1)(2)(3), Santermans 
T(1), Tsontaki M(2)(3), Verstrepen KJ(2)(3), Jelier R(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Predictive Genetics and Multicellular Systems, CMPG, KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Genetics and Genomics, CMPG, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Laboratory for Systems Biology, VIB-KU Leuven Center for Microbiology, 
Leuven, Belgium.

Loss of gene function is common throughout evolution, even though it often leads 
to reduced fitness. In this study, we systematically evaluated how an organism 
adapts after deleting genes that are important for growth under oxidative 
stress. By evolving, sequencing, and phenotyping over 200 yeast lineages, we 
found that gene loss can enhance an organism's capacity to evolve and adapt. 
Although gene loss often led to an immediate decrease in fitness, many mutants 
rapidly acquired suppressor mutations that restored fitness. Depending on the 
strain's genotype, some ultimately even attained higher fitness levels than 
similarly adapted wild-type cells. Further, cells with deletions in different 
modules of the genetic network followed distinct and predictable mutational 
trajectories. Finally, losing highly connected genes increased evolvability by 
facilitating the emergence of a more diverse array of phenotypes after 
adaptation. Together, our findings show that loss of specific parts of a genetic 
network can facilitate adaptation by opening alternative evolutionary paths.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa172
PMCID: PMC7530610
PMID: 32658971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1202. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3469-3484. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa177.

Allopatric and Sympatric Drivers of Speciation in Alviniconcha Hydrothermal Vent 
Snails.

Breusing C(1), Johnson SB(2), Tunnicliffe V(3), Clague DA(2), Vrijenhoek RC(2), 
Beinart RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island, Narragansett, 
RI.
(2)Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, Moss Landing, CA.
(3)Department of Biology and School of Earth and Ocean Sciences, University of 
Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.

Despite significant advances in our understanding of speciation in the marine 
environment, the mechanisms underlying evolutionary diversification in deep-sea 
habitats remain poorly investigated. Here, we used multigene molecular clocks 
and population genetic inferences to examine processes that led to the emergence 
of the six extant lineages of Alviniconcha snails, a key taxon inhabiting 
deep-sea hydrothermal vents in the Indo-Pacific Ocean. We show that both 
allopatric divergence through historical vicariance and ecological isolation due 
to niche segregation contributed to speciation in this genus. The split between 
the two major Alviniconcha clades (separating A. boucheti and A. marisindica 
from A. kojimai, A. hessleri, and A. strummeri) probably resulted from tectonic 
processes leading to geographic separation, whereas the splits between 
co-occurring species might have been influenced by ecological factors, such as 
the availability of specific chemosynthetic symbionts. Phylogenetic origin of 
the sixth species, Alviniconcha adamantis, remains uncertain, although its 
sister position to other extant Alviniconcha lineages indicates a possible 
ancestral relationship. This study lays a foundation for future genomic studies 
aimed at deciphering the roles of local adaptation, reproductive biology, and 
host-symbiont compatibility in speciation of these vent-restricted snails.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa177
PMCID: PMC7743903
PMID: 32658967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1203. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3380-3388. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa170.

Intragenic Conflict in Phylogenomic Data Sets.

Smith SA(1), Walker-Hale N(2), Walker JF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(3)The Sainsbury Laboratory (SLCU), University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Most phylogenetic analyses assume that a single evolutionary history underlies 
one gene. However, both biological processes and errors can cause intragenic 
conflict. The extent to which this conflict is present in empirical data sets is 
not well documented, but if common, could have far-reaching implications for 
phylogenetic analyses. We examined several large phylogenomic data sets from 
diverse taxa using a fast and simple method to identify well-supported 
intragenic conflict. We found conflict to be highly variable between data sets, 
from 1% to >92% of genes investigated. We analyzed four exemplar genes in detail 
and analyzed simulated data under several scenarios. Our results suggest that 
alignment error may be one major source of conflict, but other conflicts remain 
unexplained and may represent biological signal or other errors. Whether as part 
of data analysis pipelines or to explore biologically processes, analyses of 
within-gene phylogenetic signal should become common.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa170
PMID: 32658966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1204. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3654-3671. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa171.

The Theory and Applications of Measuring Broad-Range and Chromosome-Wide 
Recombination Rate from Allele Frequency Decay around a Selected Locus.

Wei KH(1), Mantha A(1), Bachtrog D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.

Recombination is the exchange of genetic material between homologous chromosomes 
via physical crossovers. High-throughput sequencing approaches detect crossovers 
genome wide to produce recombination rate maps but are difficult to scale as 
they require large numbers of recombinants individually sequenced. We present a 
simple and scalable pooled-sequencing approach to experimentally infer near 
chromosome-wide recombination rates by taking advantage of non-Mendelian allele 
frequency generated from a fitness differential at a locus under selection. As 
more crossovers decouple the selected locus from distal loci, the distorted 
allele frequency attenuates distally toward Mendelian and can be used to 
estimate the genetic distance. Here, we use marker selection to generate 
distorted allele frequency and theoretically derive the mathematical 
relationships between allele frequency attenuation, genetic distance, and 
recombination rate in marker-selected pools. We implemented nonlinear 
curve-fitting methods that robustly estimate the allele frequency decay from 
batch sequencing of pooled individuals and derive chromosome-wide genetic 
distance and recombination rates. Empirically, we show that marker-selected 
pools closely recapitulate genetic distances inferred from scoring recombinants. 
Using this method, we generated novel recombination rate maps of three 
wild-derived strains of Drosophila melanogaster, which strongly correlate with 
previous measurements. Moreover, we show that this approach can be extended to 
estimate chromosome-wide crossover interference with reciprocal marker selection 
and discuss how it can be applied in the absence of visible markers. Altogether, 
we find that our method is a simple and cost-effective approach to generate 
chromosome-wide recombination rate maps requiring only one or two libraries.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa171
PMCID: PMC7743735
PMID: 32658965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1205. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2706-2710. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa178.

Viral CpG Deficiency Provides No Evidence That Dogs Were Intermediate Hosts for 
SARS-CoV-2.

Pollock DD(1), Castoe TA(2), Perry BW(2), Lytras S(3), Wade KJ(1), Robertson 
DL(3), Holmes EC(4), Boni MF(5), Kosakovsky Pond SL(6), Parry R(7), Carlton 
EJ(8), Wood JLN(9), Pennings PS(10), Goldstein RA(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Texas Arlington, Arlington, TX.
(3)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research (CVR), Glasgow, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Marie Bashir Institute for Infectious Diseases & Biosecurity, School of Life 
& Environmental Sciences and School of Medical Sciences, The University of 
Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)5Center for Infectious Disease Dynamics, Department of Biology, Pennsylvania 
State University, University Park, PA.
(6)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(7)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, School of Biological Sciences, 
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(8)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Colorado School of 
Public Health, University of Colorado, Anschutz, Aurora, CO.
(9)Disease Dynamics Unit, Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Biology, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA.
(11)Division of Infection & Immunity, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa094.
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa162.

Due to the scope and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic there exists a strong 
desire to understand where the SARS-CoV-2 virus came from and how it jumped 
species boundaries to humans. Molecular evolutionary analyses can trace viral 
origins by establishing relatedness and divergence times of viruses and 
identifying past selective pressures. However, we must uphold rigorous standards 
of inference and interpretation on this topic because of the ramifications of 
being wrong. Here, we dispute the conclusions of Xia (2020. Extreme genomic CpG 
deficiency in SARS-CoV-2 and evasion of host antiviral defense. Mol Biol Evol. 
doi:10.1093/molbev/masa095) that dogs are a likely intermediate host of a 
SARS-CoV-2 ancestor. We highlight major flaws in Xia's inference process and his 
analysis of CpG deficiencies, and conclude that there is no direct evidence for 
the role of dogs as intermediate hosts. Bats and pangolins currently have the 
greatest support as ancestral hosts of SARS-CoV-2, with the strong caveat that 
sampling of wildlife species for coronaviruses has been limited.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa178
PMCID: PMC7454803
PMID: 32658964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1206. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3453-3468. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa175.

Battle of the Sex Chromosomes: Competition between X and Y Chromosome-Encoded 
Proteins for Partner Interaction and Chromatin Occupancy Drives Multicopy Gene 
Expression and Evolution in Muroid Rodents.

Moretti C(1)(2), Blanco M(1), Ialy-Radio C(1), Serrentino ME(1), Gobé C(1), 
Friedman R(3), Battail C(4), Leduc M(1)(5), Ward MA(6), Vaiman D(1), Tores F(7), 
Cocquet J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, Université de Paris, Paris, 
France.
(2)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Université de Lyon, CNRS UMR 
5242, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, 
France.
(3)Ohana Biosciences, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, INSERM, IRIG, Biology of Cancer and Infection 
UMR_S 1036, 38000 Grenoble, France.
(5)Plateforme Protéomique 3P5, Institut Cochin, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR8104, 
Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)Institute for Biogenesis Research, John A. Burns School of Medicine, 
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA.
(7)Plateforme de Bio-informatique, Institut Imagine, Université de Paris, Paris, 
France.

Transmission distorters (TDs) are genetic elements that favor their own 
transmission to the detriments of others. Slx/Slxl1 (Sycp3-like-X-linked and 
Slx-like1) and Sly (Sycp3-like-Y-linked) are TDs, which have been coamplified on 
the X and Y chromosomes of Mus species. They are involved in an intragenomic 
conflict in which each favors its own transmission, resulting in sex ratio 
distortion of the progeny when Slx/Slxl1 versus Sly copy number is unbalanced. 
They are specifically expressed in male postmeiotic gametes (spermatids) and 
have opposite effects on gene expression: Sly knockdown leads to the 
upregulation of hundreds of spermatid-expressed genes, whereas 
Slx/Slxl1-deficiency downregulates them. When both Slx/Slxl1 and Sly are knocked 
down, sex ratio distortion and gene deregulation are corrected. Slx/Slxl1 and 
Sly are, therefore, in competition but the molecular mechanism remains unknown. 
By comparing their chromatin-binding profiles and protein partners, we show that 
SLX/SLXL1 and SLY proteins compete for interaction with H3K4me3-reader SSTY1 
(Spermiogenesis-specific-transcript-on-the-Y1) at the promoter of thousands of 
genes to drive their expression, and that the opposite effect they have on gene 
expression is mediated by different abilities to recruit SMRT/N-Cor 
transcriptional complex. Their target genes are predominantly spermatid-specific 
multicopy genes encoded by the sex chromosomes and the autosomal Speer/Takusan. 
Many of them have coamplified with not only Slx/Slxl1/Sly but also Ssty during 
muroid rodent evolution. Overall, we identify Ssty as a key element of the X 
versus Y intragenomic conflict, which may have influenced gene content and 
hybrid sterility beyond Mus lineage since Ssty amplification on the Y predated 
that of Slx/Slxl1/Sly.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa175
PMCID: PMC7743899
PMID: 32658962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1207. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3439-3452. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa173.

Genome-Wide Association Analysis Identifies a Genetic Basis of Infectivity in a 
Model Bacterial Pathogen.

Andras JP(1), Fields PD(2), Du Pasquier L(2), Fredericksen M(2), Ebert D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA.
(2)Division of Zoology, Department of Environmental Sciences, University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Knowledge of the genetic architecture of pathogen infectivity and host 
resistance is essential for a mechanistic understanding of coevolutionary 
processes, yet the genetic basis of these interacting traits remains unknown for 
most host-pathogen systems. We used a comparative genomic approach to explore 
the genetic basis of infectivity in Pasteuria ramosa, a Gram-positive bacterial 
pathogen of planktonic crustaceans that has been established as a model for 
studies of Red Queen host-pathogen coevolution. We sequenced the genomes of a 
geographically, phenotypically, and genetically diverse collection of P. ramosa 
strains and performed a genome-wide association study to identify genetic 
correlates of infection phenotype. We found multiple polymorphisms within a 
single gene, Pcl7, that correlate perfectly with one common and widespread 
infection phenotype. We then confirmed this perfect association via Sanger 
sequencing in a large and diverse sample set of P. ramosa clones. Pcl7 codes for 
a collagen-like protein, a class of adhesion proteins known or suspected to be 
involved in the infection mechanisms of a number of important bacterial 
pathogens. Consistent with expectations under Red Queen coevolution, sequence 
variation of Pcl7 shows evidence of balancing selection, including 
extraordinarily high diversity and absence of geographic structure. Based on 
structural homology with a collagen-like protein of Bacillus anthracis, we 
propose a hypothesis for the structure of Pcl7 and the physical location of the 
phenotype-associated polymorphisms. Our results offer strong evidence for a gene 
governing infectivity and provide a molecular basis for further study of Red 
Queen dynamics in this model host-pathogen system.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa173
PMCID: PMC7743900
PMID: 32658956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1208. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3188-3210. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa160.

Asterid Phylogenomics/Phylotranscriptomics Uncover Morphological Evolutionary 
Histories and Support Phylogenetic Placement for Numerous Whole-Genome 
Duplications.

Zhang C(1), Zhang T(1), Luebert F(2)(3), Xiang Y(1), Huang CH(1), Hu Y(4), Rees 
M(5), Frohlich MW(5), Qi J(1), Weigend M(2), Ma H(4).

Author information:
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Biodiversity Science and Ecological 
Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Nees Institute for Biodiversity of Plants, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Silviculture and Nature Conservation, University of Chile, 
Santiago, Chile.
(4)Department of Biology, The Eberly College of Science, and The Huck Institutes 
of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(5)Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey, United Kingdom.

Asterids are one of the most successful angiosperm lineages, exhibiting 
extensive morphological diversity and including a number of important crops. 
Despite their biological prominence and value to humans, the deep asterid 
phylogeny has not been fully resolved, and the evolutionary landscape underlying 
their radiation remains unknown. To resolve the asterid phylogeny, we sequenced 
213 transcriptomes/genomes and combined them with other data sets, representing 
all accepted orders and nearly all families of asterids. We show fully supported 
monophyly of asterids, Berberidopsidales as sister to asterids, monophyly of all 
orders except Icacinales, Aquifoliales, and Bruniales, and monophyly of all 
families except Icacinaceae and Ehretiaceae. Novel taxon placements benefited 
from the expanded sampling with living collections from botanical gardens, 
resolving hitherto uncertain relationships. The remaining ambiguous placements 
here are likely due to limited sampling and could be addressed in the future 
with relevant additional taxa. Using our well-resolved phylogeny as reference, 
divergence time estimates support an Aptian (Early Cretaceous) origin of 
asterids and the origin of all orders before the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary. 
Ancestral state reconstruction at the family level suggests that the asterid 
ancestor was a woody terrestrial plant with simple leaves, bisexual, and 
actinomorphic flowers with free petals and free anthers, a superior ovary with a 
style, and drupaceous fruits. Whole-genome duplication (WGD) analyses provide 
strong evidence for 33 WGDs in asterids and one in Berberidopsidales, including 
four suprafamilial and seven familial/subfamilial WGDs. Our results advance the 
understanding of asterid phylogeny and provide numerous novel evolutionary 
insights into their diversification and morphological evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa160
PMID: 32652014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1209. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3642-3653. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa169.

Recent Demographic History Inferred by High-Resolution Analysis of Linkage 
Disequilibrium.

Santiago E(1), Novo I(2), Pardiñas AF(3), Saura M(4), Wang J(5), Caballero A(2).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Funcional, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de 
Oviedo, Oviedo, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Mariña, Departamento de Bioquímica, Genética e 
Inmunología, Edificio CC Experimentais, Campus de Vigo, Universidade de Vigo, 
Vigo, Spain.
(3)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Division of 
Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(4)Departamento de Mejora Genética Animal, INIA, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London, London, United Kingdom.

Inferring changes in effective population size (Ne) in the recent past is of 
special interest for conservation of endangered species and for human history 
research. Current methods for estimating the very recent historical Ne are 
unable to detect complex demographic trajectories involving multiple episodes of 
bottlenecks, drops, and expansions. We develop a theoretical and computational 
framework to infer the demographic history of a population within the past 100 
generations from the observed spectrum of linkage disequilibrium (LD) of pairs 
of loci over a wide range of recombination rates in a sample of contemporary 
individuals. The cumulative contributions of all of the previous generations to 
the observed LD are included in our model, and a genetic algorithm is used to 
search for the sequence of historical Ne values that best explains the observed 
LD spectrum. The method can be applied from large samples to samples of fewer 
than ten individuals using a variety of genotyping and DNA sequencing data: 
haploid, diploid with phased or unphased genotypes and pseudohaploid data from 
low-coverage sequencing. The method was tested by computer simulation for 
sensitivity to genotyping errors, temporal heterogeneity of samples, population 
admixture, and structural division into subpopulations, showing high tolerance 
to deviations from the assumptions of the model. Computer simulations also show 
that the proposed method outperforms other leading approaches when the inference 
concerns recent timeframes. Analysis of data from a variety of human and animal 
populations gave results in agreement with previous estimations by other methods 
or with records of historical events.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa169
PMID: 32642779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1210. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3211-3224. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa166.

A Simulation Study to Examine the Information Content in Phylogenomic Data Sets 
under the Multispecies Coalescent Model.

Huang J(1)(2), Flouri T(1), Yang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, P.R. China.

We use computer simulation to examine the information content in multilocus data 
sets for inference under the multispecies coalescent model. Inference problems 
considered include estimation of evolutionary parameters (such as species 
divergence times, population sizes, and cross-species introgression 
probabilities), species tree estimation, and species delimitation based on 
Bayesian comparison of delimitation models. We found that the number of loci is 
the most influential factor for almost all inference problems examined. Although 
the number of sequences per species does not appear to be important to species 
tree estimation, it is very influential to species delimitation. Increasing the 
number of sites and the per-site mutation rate both increase the mutation rate 
for the whole locus and these have the same effect on estimation of parameters, 
but the sequence length has a greater effect than the per-site mutation rate for 
species tree estimation. We discuss the computational costs when the data size 
increases and provide guidelines concerning the subsampling of genomic data to 
enable the application of full-likelihood methods of inference.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa166
PMID: 32642765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1211. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3423-3438. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa167.

Prdm9 Intersubspecific Interactions in Hybrid Male Sterility of House Mouse.

Mukaj A(1), Piálek J(2), Fotopulosova V(1), Morgan AP(3), Odenthal-Hesse L(4), 
Parvanov ED(1), Forejt J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mouse Molecular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Genetics of 
the Czech Academy of Science, Vestec, Czech Republic.
(2)Research Facility Studenec, Institute of Vertebrate Biology of the Czech 
Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Hospital, Durham, NC.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Biology, Ploen, Germany.

The classical definition posits hybrid sterility as a phenomenon when two 
parental taxa each of which is fertile produce a hybrid that is sterile. The 
first hybrid sterility gene in vertebrates, Prdm9, coding for a histone 
methyltransferase, was identified in crosses between two laboratory mouse 
strains derived from Mus mus musculus and M. m. domesticus subspecies. The 
unique function of PRDM9 protein in the initiation of meiotic recombination led 
to the discovery of the basic molecular mechanism of hybrid sterility in 
laboratory crosses. However, the role of this protein as a component of 
reproductive barrier outside the laboratory model remained unclear. Here, we 
show that the Prdm9 allelic incompatibilities represent the primary cause of 
reduced fertility in intersubspecific hybrids between M. m. musculus and M. m. 
domesticus including 16 musculus and domesticus wild-derived strains. Disruption 
of fertility phenotypes correlated with the rate of failure of synapsis between 
homologous chromosomes in meiosis I and with early meiotic arrest. All 
phenotypes were restored to normal when the domesticus Prdm9dom2 allele was 
substituted with the Prdm9dom2H humanized variant. To conclude, our data show 
for the first time the male infertility of wild-derived musculus and domesticus 
subspecies F1 hybrids controlled by Prdm9 as the major hybrid sterility gene. 
The impairment of fertility surrogates, testes weight and sperm count, 
correlated with increasing difficulties of meiotic synapsis of homologous 
chromosomes and with meiotic arrest, which we suppose reflect the increasing 
asymmetry of PRDM9-dependent DNA double-strand breaks.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa167
PMCID: PMC7743643
PMID: 32642764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1212. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3225-3231. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa168.

Higher Germline Mutagenesis of Genes with Stronger Testis Expressions Refutes 
the Transcriptional Scanning Hypothesis.

Liu H(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.

Why are more genes expressed in the testis than in any other organ in mammals? 
The recently proposed transcriptional scanning hypothesis posits that 
transcription alleviates mutagenesis through transcription-coupled repair so has 
been selected in the testis to modulate the germline mutation rate in a 
gene-specific manner. Here, we show that this hypothesis is theoretically 
untenable because the selection would be too weak to have an effect in mammals. 
Furthermore, the analysis purported to support the hypothesis did not control 
known confounding factors and inappropriately excluded genes with no observed de 
novo mutations. After remedying these problems, we find the human germline 
mutation rate of a gene to rise with its testis expression level. This trend 
also exists for inferred coding strand-originated mutations, suggesting that it 
arises from transcription-associated mutagenesis. Furthermore, the testis 
expression level of a gene robustly correlates with its overall expression in 
other organs, nullifying the need to explain the testis silencing of a minority 
of genes by adaptive germline mutagenesis. Taken together, our results 
demonstrate that human testis transcription increases the germline mutation 
rate, rejecting the transcriptional scanning hypothesis of extensive gene 
expressions in the mammalian testis.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa168
PMCID: PMC7825000
PMID: 32638015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1213. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3632-3641. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa164.

Distinguishing Felsenstein Zone from Farris Zone Using Neural Networks.

Leuchtenberger AF(1), Crotty SM(1)(2)(3), Drucks T(1), Schmidt HA(1), 
Burgstaller-Muehlbacher S(1), von Haeseler A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Integrative Bioinformatics Vienna, Max Perutz Labs, University of 
Vienna and Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia.
(3)ARC Centre of Excellence for Mathematical and Statistical Frontiers, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(4)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Faculty of Computer Science, 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony are two key methods for phylogenetic 
tree reconstruction. Under certain conditions, each of these two methods can 
perform more or less efficiently, resulting in unresolved or disputed 
phylogenies. We show that a neural network can distinguish between four-taxon 
alignments that were evolved under conditions susceptible to either long-branch 
attraction or long-branch repulsion. When likelihood and parsimony methods are 
discordant, the neural network can provide insight as to which tree 
reconstruction method is best suited to the alignment. When applied to the 
contentious case of Strepsiptera evolution, our method shows robust support for 
the current scientific view, that is, it places Strepsiptera with beetles, 
distant from flies.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa164
PMCID: PMC7743852
PMID: 32637998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1214. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3409-3422. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa158.

Coevolution in Hybrid Genomes: Nuclear-Encoded Rubisco Small Subunits and Their 
Plastid-Targeting Translocons Accompanying Sequential Allopolyploidy Events in 
Triticum.

Li C(1), Wang X(1), Xiao Y(1), Sun X(1), Wang J(1), Yang X(1), Sun Y(1), Sha 
Y(1), Lv R(1), Yu Y(1), Ding B(1), Zhang Z(1), Li N(1), Wang T(1), Wendel JF(2), 
Liu B(1), Gong L(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Epigenetics of the Ministry of Education (MOE), 
Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China.
(2)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Organismal Biology, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA.

The Triticum/Aegilops complex includes hybrid species resulting from homoploid 
hybrid speciation and allopolyploid speciation. Sequential allotetra- and 
allohexaploidy events presumably result in two challenges for the hybrids, which 
involve 1) cytonuclear stoichiometric disruptions caused by combining two 
diverged nuclear genomes with the maternal inheritance of the cytoplasmic 
organellar donor; and 2) incompatibility of chimeric protein complexes with 
diverged subunits from nuclear and cytoplasmic genomes. Here, we describe 
coevolution of nuclear rbcS genes encoding the small subunits of Rubisco 
(ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase) and nuclear genes encoding 
plastid translocons, which mediate recognition and translocation of 
nuclear-encoded proteins into plastids, in allopolyploid wheat species. We 
demonstrate that intergenomic paternal-to-maternal gene conversion specifically 
occurred in the genic region of the homoeologous rbcS3 gene from the D-genome 
progenitor of wheat (abbreviated as rbcS3D) such that it encodes a maternal-like 
or B-subgenome-like SSU3D transit peptide in allohexaploid wheat but not in 
allotetraploid wheat. Divergent and limited interaction between SSU3D and the 
D-subgenomic TOC90D translocon subunit is implicated to underpin SSU3D targeting 
into the chloroplast of hexaploid wheat. This implicates early selection 
favoring individuals harboring optimal maternal-like organellar SSU3D targeting 
in hexaploid wheat. These data represent a novel dimension of cytonuclear 
evolution mediated by organellar targeting and transportation of nuclear 
proteins.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa158
PMCID: PMC7743682
PMID: 32602899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1215. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3389-3396. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa159.

Broccoli: Combining Phylogenetic and Network Analyses for Orthology Assignment.

Derelle R(1), Philippe H(2)(3), Colbourne JK(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Station d'Ecologie Théorique et Expérimentale, UMR CNRS 5321, Moulis, France.
(3)Département de Biochimie, Centre Robert-Cedergren, Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, QC, Canada.

Orthology assignment is a key step of comparative genomic studies, for which 
many bioinformatic tools have been developed. However, all gene clustering 
pipelines are based on the analysis of protein distances, which are subject to 
many artifacts. In this article, we introduce Broccoli, a user-friendly pipeline 
designed to infer, with high precision, orthologous groups, and pairs of 
proteins using a phylogeny-based approach. Briefly, Broccoli performs ultrafast 
phylogenetic analyses on most proteins and builds a network of orthologous 
relationships. Orthologous groups are then identified from the network using a 
parameter-free machine learning algorithm. Broccoli is also able to detect 
chimeric proteins resulting from gene-fusion events and to assign these proteins 
to the corresponding orthologous groups. Tested on two benchmark data sets, 
Broccoli outperforms current orthology pipelines. In addition, Broccoli is 
scalable, with runtimes similar to those of recent distance-based pipelines. 
Given its high level of performance and efficiency, this new pipeline represents 
a suitable choice for comparative genomic studies. Broccoli is freely available 
at https://github.com/rderelle/Broccoli.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa159
PMID: 32602888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1216. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2775. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa074.

Corrigendum to: Recurrent Collection of Drosophila melanogaster from Wild 
African Environments and Genomic Insights into Species History.

Sprengelmeyer QD, Mansourian S, Lange JD, Matute DR, Cooper BS, Jirle EV, 
Stensmyr MC, Pool JE.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):627-638.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa074
PMCID: PMC7475032
PMID: 32594182


1217. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2983-2988. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa157.

Comparative Genomics Reveals Evolution of a Beak Morphology Locus in a 
High-Altitude Songbird.

Cheng Y(1), Miller MJ(2), Zhang D(1), Song G(1), Jia C(1), Qu Y(1), Lei 
F(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History and Department of Biology, 
University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

The Ground Tit (Pseudopodoces humilis) has lived on the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau 
for ∼5.7 My and has the highest altitudinal distribution among all parids. This 
species has evolved an elongated beak in response to long-term selection imposed 
by ground-foraging and cavity-nesting habits, yet the genetic basis for beak 
elongation remains unknown. Here, we perform genome-wide analyses across 14 
parid species and identify 25 highly divergent genomic regions that are 
significantly associated with beak length, finding seven candidate genes 
involved in bone morphogenesis and remolding. Neutrality tests indicate that a 
model allowing for a selective sweep in the highly conserved COL27A1 gene best 
explains variation in beak length. We also identify two nonsynonymous fixed 
mutations in the collagen domain that are predicted to be functionally 
deleterious yet may have facilitated beak elongation. Our study provides 
evidence of adaptive alleles in COL27A1 with major effects on beak elongation of 
Ps. humilis.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa157
PMID: 32592485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1218. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3175-3187. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa156.

Recent Common Origin, Reduced Population Size, and Marked Admixture Have Shaped 
European Roma Genomes.

Bianco E(1), Laval G(2), Font-Porterias N(1), García-Fernández C(1), Dobon B(1), 
Sabido-Vera R(1), Sukarova Stefanovska E(3), Kučinskas V(4), Makukh H(5), Pamjav 
H(6), Quintana-Murci L(2)(7), Netea MG(8)(9), Bertranpetit J(1), Calafell F(1), 
Comas D(1).

Author information:
(1)Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Institut de Biologia 
Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Human Evolutionary Genetics Unit, Department of Genomes and Genetics, UMR 
2000, CNRS, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology "Georgi D. 
Efremov", Macedonian Academy of Science and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia.
(4)Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
(5)Institute of Hereditary Pathology of the Ukrainian Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Lviv, Ukraine.
(6)Department of Reference Sample Analysis, Institute of Forensic Genetics, 
Hungarian Institute for Forensic Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
(7)Chair Human Genomics and Evolution, Collège de France, Paris, France.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, Life and Medical Sciences 12 
Institute (LIMES), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The Roma Diaspora-traditionally known as Gypsies-remains among the least 
explored population migratory events in historical times. It involved the 
migration of Roma ancestors out-of-India through the plateaus of Western Asia 
ultimately reaching Europe. The demographic effects of the Diaspora-bottlenecks, 
endogamy, and gene flow-might have left marked molecular traces in the Roma 
genomes. Here, we analyze the whole-genome sequence of 46 Roma individuals 
pertaining to four migrant groups in six European countries. Our analyses 
revealed a strong, early founder effect followed by a drastic reduction of ∼44% 
in effective population size. The Roma common ancestors split from the Punjabi 
population, from Northwest India, some generations before the Diaspora started, 
<2,000 years ago. The initial bottleneck and subsequent endogamy are revealed by 
the occurrence of extensive runs of homozygosity and identity-by-descent 
segments in all Roma populations. Furthermore, we provide evidence of gene flow 
from Armenian and Anatolian groups in present-day Roma, although the primary 
contribution to Roma gene pool comes from non-Roma Europeans, which accounts for 
>50% of their genomes. The linguistic and historical differentiation of Roma in 
migrant groups is confirmed by the differential proportion, but not a 
differential source, of European admixture in the Roma groups, which shows a 
westward cline. In the present study, we found that despite the strong admixture 
Roma had in their diaspora, the signature of the initial bottleneck and the 
subsequent endogamy is still present in Roma genomes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa156
PMID: 32589725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1219. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3338-3352. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa154.

ModelTeller: Model Selection for Optimal Phylogenetic Reconstruction Using 
Machine Learning.

Abadi S(1), Avram O(2), Rosset S(3), Pupko T(2), Mayrose I(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Plant Sciences and Food security, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 
Israel.
(2)School of Molecular Cell Biology & Biotechnology, Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(3)Department of Statistics and Operations Research, School of Mathematical 
Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

Statistical criteria have long been the standard for selecting the best model 
for phylogenetic reconstruction and downstream statistical inference. Although 
model selection is regarded as a fundamental step in phylogenetics, existing 
methods for this task consume computational resources for long processing time, 
they are not always feasible, and sometimes depend on preliminary assumptions 
which do not hold for sequence data. Moreover, although these methods are 
dedicated to revealing the processes that underlie the sequence data, they do 
not always produce the most accurate trees. Notably, phylogeny reconstruction 
consists of two related tasks, topology reconstruction and branch-length 
estimation. It was previously shown that in many cases the most complex model, 
GTR+I+G, leads to topologies that are as accurate as using existing model 
selection criteria, but overestimates branch lengths. Here, we present 
ModelTeller, a computational methodology for phylogenetic model selection, 
devised within the machine-learning framework, optimized to predict the most 
accurate nucleotide substitution model for branch-length estimation. We 
demonstrate that ModelTeller leads to more accurate branch-length inference than 
current model selection criteria on data sets simulated under realistic 
processes. ModelTeller relies on a readily implemented machine-learning model 
and thus the prediction according to features extracted from the sequence data 
results in a substantial decrease in running time compared with existing 
strategies. By harnessing the machine-learning framework, we distinguish between 
features that mostly contribute to branch-length optimization, concerning the 
extent of sequence divergence, and features that are related to estimates of the 
model parameters that are important for the selection made by current criteria.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa154
PMID: 32585030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1220. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Dec 16;37(12):3399-3408. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa155.

Pervasive Selection against MicroRNA Target Sites in Human Populations.

Hatlen A(1), Marco A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, United Kingdom.

MicroRNA target sites are often conserved during evolution and purifying 
selection to maintain such sites is expected. On the other hand, comparative 
analyses identified a paucity of microRNA target sites in coexpressed 
transcripts, and novel target sites can potentially be deleterious. We proposed 
that selection against novel target sites pervasive. The analysis of derived 
allele frequencies revealed that, when the derived allele is a target site, the 
proportion of nontarget sites is higher than expected, particularly for highly 
expressed microRNAs. Thus, new alleles generating novel microRNA target sites 
can be deleterious and selected against. When we analyzed ancestral target 
sites, the derived (nontarget) allele frequency does not show statistical 
support for microRNA target allele conservation. We investigated the joint 
effects of microRNA conservation and expression and found that selection against 
microRNA target sites depends mostly on the expression level of the microRNA. We 
identified microRNA target sites with relatively high levels of population 
differentiation. However, when we analyze separately target sites in which the 
target allele is ancestral to the population, the proportion of 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms with high Fst significantly increases. These 
findings support that population differentiation is more likely in target sites 
that are lost than in the gain of new target sites. Our results indicate that 
selection against novel microRNA target sites is prevalent and, although 
individual sites may have a weak selective pressure, the overall effect across 
untranslated regions is not negligible and should be accounted when studying the 
evolution of genomic sequences.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa155
PMCID: PMC7743725
PMID: 32585012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1221. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3105-3117. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa148.

Interspecific Gene Flow and the Evolution of Specialization in Black and White 
Rhinoceros.

Moodley Y(1), Westbury MV(2), Russo IM(3), Gopalakrishnan S(2), Rakotoarivelo 
A(1)(4), Olsen RA(5), Prost S(6)(7), Tunstall T(8), Ryder OA(8), Dalén L(9)(10), 
Bruford MW(3)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Venda, Thohoyandou, Republic of South 
Africa.
(2)Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
(4)Natiora Ahy Madagasikara, Ampahibe, Antananarivo, Madagascar.
(5)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Stockholm University, Solna, Sweden.
(6)LOEWE-Centre for Translational Biodiversity Genomics, Senckenberg Museum, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
(7)South African National Biodiversity Institute, National Zoological Gardens, 
Pretoria, Republic of South Africa.
(8)San Diego Zoo Institute for Conservation Research, San Diego Zoo Global, 
Escondido, CA.
(9)Centre for Palaeogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Department of Bioinformatics and Genetics, Swedish Museum of Natural 
History, Stockholm, Sweden.
(11)Sustainable Places Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom.

Africa's black (Diceros bicornis) and white (Ceratotherium simum) rhinoceros are 
closely related sister-taxa that evolved highly divergent obligate browsing and 
grazing feeding strategies. Although their precursor species Diceros praecox and 
Ceratotherium mauritanicum appear in the fossil record ∼5.2 Ma, by 4 Ma both 
were still mixed feeders, and were even spatiotemporally sympatric at several 
Pliocene sites in what is today Africa's Rift Valley. Here, we ask whether or 
not D. praecox and C. mauritanicum were reproductively isolated when they came 
into Pliocene secondary contact. We sequenced and de novo assembled the first 
annotated black rhinoceros reference genome and compared it with available 
genomes of other black and white rhinoceros. We show that ancestral gene flow 
between D. praecox and C. mauritanicum ceased sometime between 3.3 and 4.1 Ma, 
despite conventional methods for the detection of gene flow from whole genome 
data returning false positive signatures of recent interspecific migration due 
to incomplete lineage sorting. We propose that ongoing Pliocene genetic 
exchange, for up to 2 My after initial divergence, could have potentially 
hindered the development of obligate feeding strategies until both species were 
fully reproductively isolated, but that the more severe and shifting 
paleoclimate of the early Pleistocene was likely the ultimate driver of 
ecological specialization in African rhinoceros.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa148
PMID: 32585004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1222. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3165-3174. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa153.

A Genomic Cluster Containing Novel and Conserved Genes is Associated with 
Cichlid Fish Dental Developmental Convergence.

Karagic N(1), Schneider RF(1), Meyer A(1), Hulsey CD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department for Zoology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Konstanz, 
Konstanz, Germany.

The two toothed jaws of cichlid fishes provide textbook examples of convergent 
evolution. Tooth phenotypes such as enlarged molar-like teeth used to process 
hard-shelled mollusks have evolved numerous times independently during cichlid 
diversification. Although the ecological benefit of molar-like teeth to crush 
prey is known, it is unclear whether the same molecular mechanisms underlie 
these convergent traits. To identify genes involved in the evolution and 
development of enlarged cichlid teeth, we performed RNA-seq on the serially 
homologous-toothed oral and pharyngeal jaws as well as the fourth toothless gill 
arch of Astatoreochromis alluaudi. We identified 27 genes that are highly 
upregulated on both tooth-bearing jaws compared with the toothless gill arch. 
Most of these genes have never been reported to play a role in tooth formation. 
Two of these genes (unk, rpfA) are not found in other vertebrate genomes but are 
present in all cichlid genomes. They also cluster genomically with two other 
highly expressed tooth genes (odam, scpp5) that exhibit conserved expression 
during vertebrate odontogenesis. Unk and rpfA were confirmed via in situ 
hybridization to be expressed in developing teeth of Astatotilapia burtoni. We 
then examined expression of the cluster's four genes in six evolutionarily 
independent and phylogenetically disparate cichlid species pairs each with a 
large- and a small-toothed species. Odam and unk commonly and scpp5 and rpfA 
always showed higher expression in larger toothed cichlid jaws. Convergent 
trophic adaptations across cichlid diversity are associated with the repeated 
developmental deployment of this genomic cluster containing conserved and novel 
cichlid-specific genes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa153
PMID: 32579214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1223. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2461. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa131.

Corrigendum to: IQ-TREE 2: New Models and Efficient Methods for Phylogenetic 
Inference in the Genomic Era.

Minh BQ, Schmidt HA, Chernomor O, Schrempf D, Woodhams MD, von Haeseler A, 
Lanfear R.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1530-1534.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa131
PMCID: PMC7403609
PMID: 32556291


1224. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3324-3337. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa149.

Synteny-Guided Resolution of Gene Trees Clarifies the Functional Impact of 
Whole-Genome Duplications.

Parey E(1), Louis A(1), Cabau C(2), Guiguen Y(3), Roest Crollius H(1), Berthelot 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure (IBENS), Ecole Normale 
Supérieure, CNRS, INSERM, Université PSL, Paris, France.
(2)SIGENAE, GenPhySE, Université de Toulouse, INRAE, ENVT, Castanet Tolosan, 
France.
(3)INRAE, LPGP, Rennes, France.

Whole-genome duplications (WGDs) have major impacts on the evolution of species, 
as they produce new gene copies contributing substantially to adaptation, 
isolation, phenotypic robustness, and evolvability. They result in large, 
complex gene families with recurrent gene losses in descendant species that 
sequence-based phylogenetic methods fail to reconstruct accurately. As a result, 
orthologs and paralogs are difficult to identify reliably in WGD-descended 
species, which hinders the exploration of functional consequences of WGDs. Here, 
we present Synteny-guided CORrection of Paralogies and Orthologies (SCORPiOs), a 
novel method to reconstruct gene phylogenies in the context of a known WGD 
event. WGDs generate large duplicated syntenic regions, which SCORPiOs 
systematically leverages as a complement to sequence evolution to infer the 
evolutionary history of genes. We applied SCORPiOs to the 320-My-old WGD at the 
origin of teleost fish. We find that almost one in four teleost gene phylogenies 
in the Ensembl database (3,394) are inconsistent with their syntenic contexts. 
For 70% of these gene families (2,387), we were able to propose an improved 
phylogenetic tree consistent with both the molecular substitution distances and 
the local syntenic information. We show that these synteny-guided phylogenies 
are more congruent with the species tree, with sequence evolution and with 
expected expression conservation patterns than those produced by 
state-of-the-art methods. Finally, we show that synteny-guided gene trees 
emphasize contributions of WGD paralogs to evolutionary innovations in the 
teleost clade.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa149
PMID: 32556216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1225. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3149-3164. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa152.

How a Scorpion Toxin Selectively Captures a Prey Sodium Channel: The Molecular 
and Evolutionary Basis Uncovered.

Zhu S(1), Gao B(1), Peigneur S(2), Tytgat J(2).

Author information:
(1)Group of Peptide Biology and Evolution, State Key Laboratory of Integrated 
Management of Pest Insects & Rodents, Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Toxicology and Pharmacology, University of Leuven (KU Leuven), 
Leuven, Belgium.

The growing resistance of insects to chemical pesticides is reducing the 
effectiveness of conventional methods for pest control and thus, the development 
of novel insecticidal agents is imperative. Scorpion toxins specific for insect 
voltage-gated sodium channels (Navs) have been considered as one of the most 
promising insecticide alternatives due to their host specificity, rapidly evoked 
toxicity, biodegradability, and the lack of resistance. However, they have not 
been developed for uses in agriculture and public health, mainly because of a 
limited understanding of their molecular and evolutionary basis controlling 
their phylogenetic selectivity. Here, we show that the traditionally defined 
insect-selective scorpion toxin LqhIT2 specifically captures a prey Nav through 
a conserved trapping apparatus comprising a three-residue-formed cavity and a 
structurally adjacent leucine. The former serves as a detector to recognize and 
bind a highly exposed channel residue conserved in insects and spiders, two 
major prey items for scorpions; and the latter subsequently seizes the "moving" 
voltage sensor via hydrophobic interactions to reduce activation energy for 
channel opening, demonstrating its action in an enzyme-like manner. Based on the 
established toxin-channel interaction model in combination with toxicity assay, 
we enlarged the toxic spectrum of LqhIT2 to spiders and certain other 
arthropods. Furthermore, we found that genetic background-dependent cavity 
shapes determine the species selectivity of LqhIT2-related toxins. We expect 
that the discovery of the trapping apparatus will improve our understanding of 
the evolution and design principle of Nav-targeted toxins from a diversity of 
arthropod predators and accelerate their uses in pest control.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa152
PMID: 32556211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1226. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2955-2965. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa146.

Micro-RNA Clusters Integrate Evolutionary Constraints on Expression and Target 
Affinities: The miR-6/5/4/286/3/309 Cluster in Drosophila.

Zhe Q(1), Yiu WC(1), Yip HY(1), Nong W(1), Yu CWC(1), Lee IHT(1), Wong AYP(1), 
Wong NWY(1), Cheung FKM(1), Chan TF(2), Lau KF(3), Zhong S(2), Chu KH(4), Tobe 
SS(5), Ferrier DEK(6), Bendena WG(7), Hui JHL(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Simon F.S. Li Marine Science Laboratory, State Key 
Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
(2)School of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong.
(3)School of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Simon F.S. Li Marine Science Laboratory, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong.
(5)Department of Cell and Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Canada.
(6)School of Biology, University of St. Andrews, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2023 Apr 4;40(4):

A striking feature of micro-RNAs is that they are often clustered in the genomes 
of animals. The functional and evolutionary consequences of this clustering 
remain obscure. Here, we investigated a micro-RNA cluster miR-6/5/4/286/3/309 
that is conserved across drosophilid lineages. Small RNA sequencing revealed 
expression of this micro-RNA cluster in Drosophila melanogaster leg discs, and 
conditional overexpression of the whole cluster resulted in leg appendage 
shortening. Transgenic overexpression lines expressing different combinations of 
micro-RNA cluster members were also constructed. Expression of individual 
micro-RNAs from the cluster resulted in a normal wild-type phenotype, but either 
the expression of several ancient micro-RNAs together (miR-5/4/286/3/309) or 
more recently evolved clustered micro-RNAs (miR-6-1/2/3) can recapitulate the 
phenotypes generated by the whole-cluster overexpression. Screening of 
transgenic fly lines revealed downregulation of leg-patterning gene cassettes in 
generation of the leg-shortening phenotype. Furthermore, cell transfection with 
different combinations of micro-RNA cluster members revealed a suite of 
downstream genes targeted by all cluster members, as well as complements of 
targets that are unique for distinct micro-RNAs. Considered together, the 
micro-RNA targets and the evolutionary ages of each micro-RNA in the cluster 
demonstrate the importance of micro-RNA clustering, where new members can 
reinforce and modify the selection forces on both the cluster regulation and the 
gene regulatory network of existing micro-RNAs. Key words: micro-RNA, cluster, 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa146
PMID: 32521021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1227. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3094-3104. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa143.

Lateral Gene Transfer Acts As an Evolutionary Shortcut to Efficient C4 
Biochemistry.

Phansopa C(1)(2), Dunning LT(1), Reid JD(2), Christin PA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

The adaptation of proteins for novel functions often requires changes in their 
kinetics via amino acid replacement. This process can require multiple 
mutations, and therefore extended periods of selection. The transfer of genes 
among distinct species might speed up the process, by providing proteins already 
adapted for the novel function. However, this hypothesis remains untested in 
multicellular eukaryotes. The grass Alloteropsis is an ideal system to test this 
hypothesis due to its diversity of genes encoding phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxylase, an enzyme that catalyzes one of the key reactions in the C4 
pathway. Different accessions of Alloteropsis either use native isoforms 
relatively recently co-opted from other functions or isoforms that were 
laterally acquired from distantly related species that evolved the C4 trait much 
earlier. By comparing the enzyme kinetics, we show that native isoforms with few 
amino acid replacements have substrate KM values similar to the non-C4 ancestral 
form, but exhibit marked increases in catalytic efficiency. The co-option of 
native isoforms was therefore followed by rapid catalytic improvements, which 
appear to rely on standing genetic variation observed within one species. Native 
C4 isoforms with more amino acid replacements exhibit additional changes in 
affinities, suggesting that the initial catalytic improvements are followed by 
gradual modifications. Finally, laterally acquired genes show both strong 
increases in catalytic efficiency and important changes in substrate handling. 
We conclude that the transfer of genes among distant species sharing the same 
physiological novelty creates an evolutionary shortcut toward more efficient 
enzymes, effectively accelerating evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa143
PMCID: PMC7751175
PMID: 32521019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1228. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3083-3093. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa138.

Peptide-Oleate Complexes Create Novel Membrane-Bound Compartments.

Hansen JS(1)(2), Tran TH(1), Cavalera M(1), Paul S(1), Chaudhuri A(1), 
Lindkvist-Petersson K(2), Ho JCS(1)(3), Svanborg C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Glycobiology, Institute of 
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Experimental Medical Science, Medical Structural Biology, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden.
(3)Centre for Biomimetic Sensor Science, School of Materials Science and 
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore.

A challenging question in evolutionary theory is the origin of cell division and 
plausible molecular mechanisms involved. Here, we made the surprising 
observation that complexes formed by short alpha-helical peptides and oleic acid 
can create multiple membrane-enclosed spaces from a single lipid vesicle. The 
findings suggest that such complexes may contain the molecular information 
necessary to initiate and sustain this process. Based on these observations, we 
propose a new molecular model to understand protocell division.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa138
PMID: 32521018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1229. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3308-3323. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa144.

Model-Based Inference of Punctuated Molecular Evolution.

Manceau M(1)(2)(3), Marin J(1), Morlon H(2), Lambert A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Collège de France, 
CNRS UMR 7241, INSERM U 1050, PSL Research University, Paris, France.
(2)IBENS, Ecole Normale Supérieure, UMR 8197 CNRS, Paris, France.
(3)DBSSE, ETH Zürich, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Laboratoire de Probabilités, Statistique et Modélisation (LPSM), Sorbonne 
Université, CNRS UMR 8001, Paris, France.

In standard models of molecular evolution, DNA sequences evolve through 
asynchronous substitutions according to Poisson processes with a constant rate 
(called the molecular clock) or a rate that can vary (relaxed clock). However, 
DNA sequences can also undergo episodes of fast divergence that will appear as 
synchronous substitutions affecting several sites simultaneously at the 
macroevolutionary timescale. Here, we develop a model, which we call the Relaxed 
Clock with Spikes model, combining basal, clock-like molecular substitutions 
with episodes of fast divergence called spikes arising at speciation events. 
Given a multiple sequence alignment and its time-calibrated species phylogeny, 
our model is able to detect speciation events (including hidden ones) 
cooccurring with spike events and to estimate the probability and amplitude of 
these spikes on the phylogeny. We identify the conditions under which spikes can 
be distinguished from the natural variance of the clock-like component of 
molecular substitutions and from variations of the clock. We apply the method to 
genes underlying snake venom proteins and identify several spikes at 
gene-specific locations in the phylogeny. This work should pave the way for 
analyses relying on whole genomes to inform on modes of species diversification.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa144
PMID: 32521005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1230. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2966-2982. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa147.

More Than One-to-Four via 2R: Evidence of an Independent Amphioxus Expansion and 
Two-Gene Ancestral Vertebrate State for MyoD-Related Myogenic Regulatory Factors 
(MRFs).

Aase-Remedios ME(1), Coll-Lladó C(1), Ferrier DEK(1).

Author information:
(1)Gatty Marine Laboratory, The Scottish Oceans Institute, School of Biology, 
University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, United Kingdom.

The evolutionary transition from invertebrates to vertebrates involved extensive 
gene duplication, but understanding precisely how such duplications contributed 
to this transition requires more detailed knowledge of specific cases of genes 
and gene families. Myogenic differentiation (MyoD) has long been recognized as a 
master developmental control gene and member of the MyoD family of bHLH 
transcription factors (myogenic regulatory factors [MRFs]) that drive myogenesis 
across the bilaterians. Phylogenetic reconstructions within this gene family are 
complicated by multiple instances of gene duplication and loss in several 
lineages. Following two rounds of whole-genome duplication (2R WGD) at the 
origin of the vertebrates, the ancestral function of MRFs is thought to have 
become partitioned among the daughter genes, so that MyoD and Myf5 act early in 
myogenic determination, whereas Myog and Myf6 are expressed later, in 
differentiating myoblasts. Comparing chordate MRFs, we find an independent 
expansion of MRFs in the invertebrate chordate amphioxus, with evidence for a 
parallel instance of subfunctionalization relative to that of vertebrates. 
Conserved synteny between chordate MRF loci supports the 2R WGD events as a 
major force in shaping the evolution of vertebrate MRFs. We also resolve 
vertebrate MRF complements and organization, finding a new type of vertebrate 
MRF gene in the process, which allowed us to infer an ancestral two-gene state 
in the vertebrates corresponding to the early- and late-acting types of MRFs. 
This necessitates a revision of previous conclusions about the simple 
one-to-four origin of vertebrate MRFs.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa147
PMCID: PMC7530620
PMID: 32520990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1231. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3258-3266. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa142.

High and Highly Variable Spontaneous Mutation Rates in Daphnia.

Ho EKH(1), Macrae F(1), Latta LC(1)(2), McIlroy P(1), Ebert D(3), Fields PD(3), 
Benner MJ(1), Schaack S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Reed College, Portland, OR.
(2)Division of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Lewis-Clark State College, 
Lewiston, ID.
(3)Department of Environmental Sciences, Zoology, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.

The rate and spectrum of spontaneous mutations are critical parameters in basic 
and applied biology because they dictate the pace and character of genetic 
variation introduced into populations, which is a prerequisite for evolution. We 
use a mutation-accumulation approach to estimate mutation parameters from 
whole-genome sequence data from multiple genotypes from multiple populations of 
Daphnia magna, an ecological and evolutionary model system. We report extremely 
high base substitution mutation rates (µ-n,bs = 8.96 × 10-9/bp/generation [95% 
CI: 6.66-11.97 × 10-9/bp/generation] in the nuclear genome and µ-m,bs = 8.7 × 
10-7/bp/generation [95% CI: 4.40-15.12 × 10-7/bp/generation] in the mtDNA), the 
highest of any eukaryote examined using this approach. Levels of intraspecific 
variation based on the range of estimates from the nine genotypes collected from 
three populations (Finland, Germany, and Israel) span 1 and 3 orders of 
magnitude, respectively, resulting in up to a ∼300-fold difference in rates 
among genomic partitions within the same lineage. In contrast, mutation spectra 
exhibit very consistent patterns across genotypes and populations, suggesting 
the mechanisms underlying the mutational process may be similar, even when the 
rates at which they occur differ. We discuss the implications of high levels of 
intraspecific variation in rates, the importance of estimating gene conversion 
rates using a mutation-accumulation approach, and the interacting factors 
influencing the evolution of mutation parameters. Our findings deepen our 
knowledge about mutation and provide both challenges to and support for current 
theories aimed at explaining the evolution of the mutation rate, as a trait, 
across taxa.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa142
PMCID: PMC7820357
PMID: 32520985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1232. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2763-2774. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa141.

GeneRax: A Tool for Species-Tree-Aware Maximum Likelihood-Based Gene  Family 
Tree Inference under Gene Duplication, Transfer, and Loss.

Morel B(1), Kozlov AM(1), Stamatakis A(1)(2), Szöllősi GJ(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Institute for Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
Karlsruhe, Germany.
(3)ELTE-MTA "Lendület" Evolutionary Genomics Research Group, Budapest, Hungary.
(4)Department of Biological Physics, Eötvös University, Budapest, Hungary.
(5)Evolutionary Systems Research Group, Centre for Ecological Research, 
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Tihany, Hungary.

Inferring phylogenetic trees for individual homologous gene families is 
difficult because alignments are often too short, and thus contain insufficient 
signal, while substitution models inevitably fail to capture the complexity of 
the evolutionary processes. To overcome these challenges, species-tree-aware 
methods also leverage information from a putative species tree. However, only 
few methods are available that implement a full likelihood framework or account 
for horizontal gene transfers. Furthermore, these methods often require 
expensive data preprocessing (e.g., computing bootstrap trees) and rely on 
approximations and heuristics that limit the degree of tree space exploration. 
Here, we present GeneRax, the first maximum likelihood species-tree-aware 
phylogenetic inference software. It simultaneously accounts for substitutions at 
the sequence level as well as gene level events, such as duplication, transfer, 
and loss relying on established maximum likelihood optimization algorithms. 
GeneRax can infer rooted phylogenetic trees for multiple gene families, directly 
from the per-gene sequence alignments and a rooted, yet undated, species tree. 
We show that compared with competing tools, on simulated data GeneRax infers 
trees that are the closest to the true tree in 90% of the simulations in terms 
of relative Robinson-Foulds distance. On empirical data sets, GeneRax is the 
fastest among all tested methods when starting from aligned sequences, and it 
infers trees with the highest likelihood score, based on our model. GeneRax 
completed tree inferences and reconciliations for 1,099 Cyanobacteria families 
in 8 min on 512 CPU cores. Thus, its parallelization scheme enables large-scale 
analyses. GeneRax is available under GNU GPL at 
https://github.com/BenoitMorel/GeneRax (last accessed June 17, 2020).

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa141
PMCID: PMC8312565
PMID: 32502238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1233. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2931-2943. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa137.

Collagen Sequence Analysis Reveals Evolutionary History of Extinct West Indies 
Nesophontes (Island-Shrews).

Buckley M(1)(2), Harvey VL(1)(2), Orihuela J(3), Mychajliw AM(4), Keating JN(5), 
Milan JNA(6), Lawless C(7), Chamberlain AT(1), Egerton VM(1)(8), Manning 
PL(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Ancient Life, School of Natural Sciences, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, Manchester, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Earth and Environment, Florida International University, Miami, 
FL.
(4)La Brea Tar Pits & Museum, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(5)School of Earth Sciences, University of Bristol, Life Sciences Building, 
Bristol, United Kingdom.
(6)Museo Nacional de Historia Natural "Prof. Eugenio de Jesús Marcano", Santo 
Domingo, Dominican Republic.
(7)School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(8)The Children's Museum of Indianapolis, Natural Sciences, Indianapolis, IN.

Ancient biomolecule analyses are proving increasingly useful in the study of 
evolutionary patterns, including extinct organisms. Proteomic sequencing 
techniques complement genomic approaches, having the potential to examine 
lineages further back in time than achievable using ancient DNA, given the less 
stringent preservation requirements. In this study, we demonstrate the ability 
to use collagen sequence analyses via proteomics to assist species delimitation 
as a foundation for informing evolutionary patterns. We uncover biogeographic 
information of an enigmatic and recently extinct lineage of Nesophontes across 
their range on the Caribbean islands. First, evolutionary relationships 
reconstructed from collagen sequences reaffirm the affinity of Nesophontes and 
Solenodon as sister taxa within Solenodonota. This relationship helps lay the 
foundation for testing geographical isolation hypotheses across islands within 
the Greater Antilles, including movement from Cuba toward Hispaniola. Second, 
our results are consistent with Cuba having just two species of Nesophontes 
(N. micrus and N. major) that exhibit intrapopulation morphological variation. 
Finally, analysis of the recently described species from the Cayman Islands 
(N. hemicingulus) indicates that it is a closer relative to N. major rather than 
N. micrus as previously speculated. This proteomic sequencing improves our 
understanding of the origin, evolution, and distribution of this extinct mammal 
lineage, particularly with respect to the approximate timing of speciation. Such 
knowledge is vital for this biodiversity hotspot, where the magnitude of recent 
extinctions may obscure true estimates of species richness in the past.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa137
PMCID: PMC7530613
PMID: 32497204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1234. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):3061-3075. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa136.

PIQMEE: Bayesian Phylodynamic Method for Analysis of Large Data Sets with 
Duplicate Sequences.

Boskova V(1)(2)(3), Stadler T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zürich, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Switzerland.
(3)Center for Integrative Bioinformatics Vienna, Max Perutz Labs, University of 
Vienna and Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Next-generation sequencing of pathogen quasispecies within a host yields data 
sets of tens to hundreds of unique sequences. However, the full data set often 
contains thousands of sequences, because many of those unique sequences have 
multiple identical copies. Data sets of this size represent a computational 
challenge for currently available Bayesian phylogenetic and phylodynamic 
methods. Through simulations, we explore how large data sets with duplicate 
sequences affect the speed and accuracy of phylogenetic and phylodynamic 
analysis within BEAST 2. We show that using unique sequences only leads to 
biases, and using a random subset of sequences yields imprecise parameter 
estimates. To overcome these shortcomings, we introduce PIQMEE, a BEAST 2 add-on 
that produces reliable parameter estimates from full data sets with increased 
computational efficiency as compared with the currently available methods within 
BEAST 2. The principle behind PIQMEE is to resolve the tree structure of the 
unique sequences only, while simultaneously estimating the branching times of 
the duplicate sequences. Distinguishing between unique and duplicate sequences 
allows our method to perform well even for very large data sets. Although the 
classic method converges poorly for data sets of 6,000 sequences when allowed to 
run for 7 days, our method converges in slightly more than 1 day. In fact, 
PIQMEE can handle data sets of around 21,000 sequences with 20 unique sequences 
in 14 days. Finally, we apply the method to a real, within-host HIV sequencing 
data set with several thousand sequences per patient.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa136
PMCID: PMC7530608
PMID: 32492139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1235. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):3003-3022. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa135.

Dental Calculus as a Tool to Study the Evolution of the Mammalian Oral 
Microbiome.

Brealey JC(1), Leitão HG(1), van der Valk T(1), Xu W(1), Bougiouri K(1), Dalén 
L(2)(3), Guschanski K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Animal Ecology, Evolutionary Biology 
Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics and Genetics, Swedish Museum of Natural History, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Centre for Palaeogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden.

Dental calculus, the calcified form of the mammalian oral microbial plaque 
biofilm, is a rich source of oral microbiome, host, and dietary biomolecules and 
is well preserved in museum and archaeological specimens. Despite its wide 
presence in mammals, to date, dental calculus has primarily been used to study 
primate microbiome evolution. We establish dental calculus as a valuable tool 
for the study of nonhuman host microbiome evolution, by using shotgun 
metagenomics to characterize the taxonomic and functional composition of the 
oral microbiome in species as diverse as gorillas, bears, and reindeer. We 
detect oral pathogens in individuals with evidence of oral disease, assemble 
near-complete bacterial genomes from historical specimens, characterize 
antibiotic resistance genes, reconstruct components of the host diet, and 
recover host genetic profiles. Our work demonstrates that metagenomic analyses 
of dental calculus can be performed on a diverse range of mammalian species, 
which will allow the study of oral microbiome and pathogen evolution from a 
comparative perspective. As dental calculus is readily preserved through time, 
it can also facilitate the quantification of the impact of anthropogenic changes 
on wildlife and the environment.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa135
PMCID: PMC7530607
PMID: 32467975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1236. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2777-2790. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa133.

Venom Systems as Models for Studying the Origin and Regulation of Evolutionary 
Novelties.

Zancolli G(1)(2), Casewell NR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Centre for Snakebite Research & Interventions, Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

A central goal in biology is to determine the ways in which evolution repeats 
itself. One of the most remarkable examples in nature of convergent evolutionary 
novelty is animal venom. Across diverse animal phyla, various specialized organs 
and anatomical structures have evolved from disparate developmental tissues to 
perform the same function, that is, produce and deliver a cocktail of potent 
molecules to subdue prey or predators. Venomous organisms therefore offer unique 
opportunities to investigate the evolutionary processes of convergence of key 
adaptive traits, and the molecular mechanisms underlying the emergence of novel 
genes, cells, and tissues. Indeed, some venomous species have already proven to 
be highly amenable as models for developmental studies, and recent work with 
venom gland organoids provides manipulatable systems for directly testing 
important evolutionary questions. Here, we provide a synthesis of the current 
knowledge that could serve as a starting point for the establishment of venom 
systems as new models for evolutionary and molecular biology. In particular, we 
highlight the potential of various venomous species for the study of cell 
differentiation and cell identity, and the regulatory dynamics of rapidly 
evolving, highly expressed, tissue-specific, gene paralogs. We hope that this 
review will encourage researchers to look beyond traditional study organisms and 
consider venom systems as useful tools to explore evolutionary novelties.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa133
PMID: 32462210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1237. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Nov 1;37(11):3267-3291. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa134.

Flexible Mixture Model Approaches That Accommodate Footprint Size Variability 
for Robust Detection of Balancing Selection.

Cheng X(1)(2), DeGiorgio M(3).

Author information:
(1)Huck Institutes of Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, PA.
(2)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(3)Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL.

Long-term balancing selection typically leaves narrow footprints of increased 
genetic diversity, and therefore most detection approaches only achieve optimal 
performances when sufficiently small genomic regions (i.e., windows) are 
examined. Such methods are sensitive to window sizes and suffer substantial 
losses in power when windows are large. Here, we employ mixture models to 
construct a set of five composite likelihood ratio test statistics, which we 
collectively term B statistics. These statistics are agnostic to window sizes 
and can operate on diverse forms of input data. Through simulations, we show 
that they exhibit comparable power to the best-performing current methods, and 
retain substantially high power regardless of window sizes. They also display 
considerable robustness to high mutation rates and uneven recombination 
landscapes, as well as an array of other common confounding scenarios. Moreover, 
we applied a specific version of the B statistics, termed B2, to a human 
population-genomic data set and recovered many top candidates from prior 
studies, including the then-uncharacterized STPG2 and CCDC169-SOHLH2, both of 
which are related to gamete functions. We further applied B2 on a bonobo 
population-genomic data set. In addition to the MHC-DQ genes, we uncovered 
several novel candidate genes, such as KLRD1, involved in viral defense, and 
SCN9A, associated with pain perception. Finally, we show that our methods can be 
extended to account for multiallelic balancing selection and integrated the set 
of statistics into open-source software named BalLeRMix for future applications 
by the scientific community.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa134
PMCID: PMC7820363
PMID: 32462188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1238. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):3047-3060. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa130.

Gradients Do Grow on Trees: A Linear-Time O(N)-Dimensional Gradient for 
Statistical Phylogenetics.

Ji X(1)(2), Zhang Z(3), Holbrook A(3), Nishimura A(4), Baele G(5), Rambaut A(6), 
Lemey P(5), Suchard MA(1)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomathematics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)Department of Mathematics, School of Science & Engineering, Tulane 
University, New Orleans, LA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Fielding School of Public Health, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, Centre for Immunology, Infection and 
Evolution, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.

Calculation of the log-likelihood stands as the computational bottleneck for 
many statistical phylogenetic algorithms. Even worse is its gradient evaluation, 
often used to target regions of high probability. Order O(N)-dimensional 
gradient calculations based on the standard pruning algorithm require O(N2) 
operations, where N is the number of sampled molecular sequences. With the 
advent of high-throughput sequencing, recent phylogenetic studies have analyzed 
hundreds to thousands of sequences, with an apparent trend toward even larger 
data sets as a result of advancing technology. Such large-scale analyses 
challenge phylogenetic reconstruction by requiring inference on larger sets of 
process parameters to model the increasing data heterogeneity. To make these 
analyses tractable, we present a linear-time algorithm for O(N)-dimensional 
gradient evaluation and apply it to general continuous-time Markov processes of 
sequence substitution on a phylogenetic tree without a need to assume either 
stationarity or reversibility. We apply this approach to learn the 
branch-specific evolutionary rates of three pathogenic viruses: West Nile virus, 
Dengue virus, and Lassa virus. Our proposed algorithm significantly improves 
inference efficiency with a 126- to 234-fold increase in maximum-likelihood 
optimization and a 16- to 33-fold computational performance increase in a 
Bayesian framework.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa130
PMCID: PMC7530611
PMID: 32458974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1239. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2900-2917. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa128.

Evolution of the Insecticide Target Rdl in African Anopheles Is Driven by 
Interspecific and Interkaryotypic Introgression.

Grau-Bové X(1), Tomlinson S(1)(2), O'Reilly AO(3), Harding NJ(4), Miles A(4)(5), 
Kwiatkowski D(4)(5), Donnelly MJ(1)(5), Weetman D(1); Anopheles gambiae 1000 
Genomes Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Health Informatics, Computing and Statistics, Lancaster 
University, Lancaster, United Kingdom.
(3)School of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Liverpool John Moores 
University, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(4)Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health 
Information and Discovery, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.

The evolution of insecticide resistance mechanisms in natural populations of 
Anopheles malaria vectors is a major public health concern across Africa. Using 
genome sequence data, we study the evolution of resistance mutations in the 
resistance to dieldrin locus (Rdl), a GABA receptor targeted by several 
insecticides, but most notably by the long-discontinued cyclodiene, dieldrin. 
The two Rdl resistance mutations (296G and 296S) spread across West and Central 
African Anopheles via two independent hard selective sweeps that included likely 
compensatory nearby mutations, and were followed by a rare combination of 
introgression across species (from A. gambiae and A. arabiensis to A. coluzzii) 
and across nonconcordant karyotypes of the 2La chromosomal inversion. Rdl 
resistance evolved in the 1950s as the first known adaptation to a large-scale 
insecticide-based intervention, but the evolutionary lessons from this system 
highlight contemporary and future dangers for management strategies designed to 
combat development of resistance in malaria vectors.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa128
PMCID: PMC7530614
PMID: 32449755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1240. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2825-2837. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa118.

Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Chromosomal Races on Islands: A 
Genome-Wide Analysis of Natural House Mouse Populations.

Franchini P(1), Kautt AF(1)(2), Nater A(1), Antonini G(3), Castiglia R(3), Meyer 
A(1), Solano E(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
(3)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Charles Darwin," "La Sapienza" 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Chromosomal evolution is widely considered to be an important driver of 
speciation, as karyotypic reorganization can bring about the establishment of 
reproductive barriers between incipient species. One textbook example for 
genetic mechanisms of speciation are large-scale chromosomal rearrangements such 
as Robertsonian (Rb) fusions, a common class of structural variants that can 
drastically change the recombination landscape by suppressing crossing-over and 
influence gene expression by altering regulatory networks. Here, we explore the 
population structure and demographic patterns of a well-known house mouse Rb 
system in the Aeolian archipelago in Southern Italy using genome-wide data. By 
analyzing chromosomal regions characterized by different levels of 
recombination, we trace the evolutionary history of a set of Rb chromosomes 
occurring in different geographical locations and test whether chromosomal 
fusions have a single shared origin or occurred multiple times. Using a 
combination of phylogenetic and population genetic approaches, we find support 
for multiple, independent origins of three focal Rb chromosomes. The elucidation 
of the demographic patterns of the mouse populations within the Aeolian 
archipelago shows that an interplay between fixation of newly formed Rb 
chromosomes and hybridization events has contributed to shaping their current 
karyotypic distribution. Overall, our results illustrate that chromosome 
structure is much more dynamic than anticipated and emphasize the importance of 
large-scale chromosomal translocations in speciation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa118
PMID: 32449753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1241. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):3076-3080. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa132.

Evolutionary Genomics at the Human-Environment Interface in Africa.

Svardal H(1)(2), Rusuwa B(3), Linderoth T(4), Kiran A(5), Charmantier A(6), 
Lattorff HMG(7), Cagan A(8), Ommeh SC(9), Kamng'ona A(10), Katongo C(11), Santos 
ME(12), Durbin R(4), Kumwenda B(10), Visscher PM(13), von der Heyden S(14); 
Participants of SMBE Malawi.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Chancellor College, University of Malawi, 
Zomba, Malawi.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Malawi-Liverpool Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Project, Blantyre, Malawi.
(6)CEFE, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Université de Paul Valéry Montpellier 
3, EPHE, IRD, Montpellier, France.
(7)International Centre of Insect Physiology and Ecology (icipe), Nairobi, 
Kenya.
(8)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(9)Institute for Biotechnology Research, Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture 
and Technology, Nairobi, Kenya.
(10)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of 
Malawi, Blantyre, Malawi.
(11)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia.
(12)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(13)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
QLD, Australia.
(14)Department of Botany and Zoology, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch, 
South Africa.

We report on the first meeting of SMBE in Africa. SMBE Malawi was initiated to 
bring together African and international researchers who use genetics or 
genomics to study natural systems impacted by human activities. The goals of 
this conference were 1) to reach a world-class standard of science with a large 
number of contributions from Africa, 2) to initiate exchange between African and 
international researchers, and 3) to identify challenges and opportunities for 
evolutionary genomics research in Africa. As repored, we think that we have 
achieved these goals and make suggestions on the way forward for African 
evolutionary genomics research.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa132
PMID: 32442309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1242. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2655-2660. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa119.

The Neandertal Progesterone Receptor.

Zeberg H(1)(2), Kelso J(1), Pääbo S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Onna-son, Japan.

The hormone progesterone is important for preparing the uterine lining for egg 
implantation and for maintaining the early stages of pregnancy. The gene 
encoding the progesterone receptor (PGR) carries introgressed Neandertal 
haplotypes with two missense substitutions and a mobile Alu element. These 
Neandertal gene variants have reached nearly 20% frequency in non-Africans and 
have been associated with preterm birth. Here, we show that one of the missense 
substitutions appears fixed in Neandertals, while the other substitution as well 
as the Alu insertion were polymorphic among Neandertals. We show that two 
Neandertal haplotypes carrying the PGR gene entered the modern human population 
and that present-day carriers of the Neandertal haplotypes express higher levels 
of the receptor. In a cohort of present-day Britons, these carriers have more 
siblings, fewer miscarriages, and less bleeding during early pregnancy 
suggesting that the Neandertal progesterone receptor alleles promote fertility. 
This may explain their high frequency in modern human populations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa119
PMCID: PMC7475037
PMID: 32437543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1243. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2887-2899. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa127.

Chaperone-Mediated Autophagy in the Light of Evolution: Insight from Fish.

Lescat L(1), Véron V(1), Mourot B(2), Péron S(2), Chenais N(2), Dias K(1), 
Riera-Heredia N(1), Beaumatin F(1), Pinel K(1), Priault M(3)(4), Panserat S(1), 
Salin B(3)(4)(5), Guiguen Y(2), Bobe J(2), Herpin A(2)(6), Seiliez I(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Pau et des Pays de l'Adour, E2S UPPA, INRAE, UMR1419 Nutrition 
Métabolisme et Aquaculture, F-64310 Saint-Pée-sur-Nivelle, France.
(2)INRAE, UR1037 Laboratory of Fish Physiology and Genomics, Campus de Beaulieu, 
Rennes, France.
(3)CNRS, IBGC, UMR5095, Bordeaux, France.
(4)IBGC, UMR5095, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(5)Service Commun de Microscopie, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Developmental Biology of Freshwater Fish, College of 
Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China.

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2020 Oct;16(10):1918-1920.

Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) is a major pathway of lysosomal proteolysis 
recognized as a key player of the control of numerous cellular functions, and 
whose defects have been associated with several human pathologies. To date, this 
cellular function is presumed to be restricted to mammals and birds, due to the 
absence of an identifiable lysosome-associated membrane protein 2A (LAMP2A), a 
limiting and essential protein for CMA, in nontetrapod species. However, the 
recent identification of expressed sequences displaying high homology with 
mammalian LAMP2A in several fish species challenges that view and suggests that 
CMA likely appeared earlier during evolution than initially thought. In the 
present study, we provide a comprehensive picture of the evolutionary history of 
the LAMP2 gene in vertebrates and demonstrate that LAMP2 indeed appeared at the 
root of the vertebrate lineage. Using a fibroblast cell line from medaka fish 
(Oryzias latipes), we further show that the splice variant lamp2a controls, upon 
long-term starvation, the lysosomal accumulation of a fluorescent reporter 
commonly used to track CMA in mammalian cells. Finally, to address the 
physiological role of Lamp2a in fish, we generated knockout medaka for that 
specific splice variant, and found that these deficient fish exhibit severe 
alterations in carbohydrate and fat metabolisms, in consistency with existing 
data in mice deficient for CMA in liver. Altogether, our data provide the first 
evidence for a CMA-like pathway in fish and bring new perspectives on the use of 
complementary genetic models, such as zebrafish or medaka, for studying CMA in 
an evolutionary perspective.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa127
PMID: 32437540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1244. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2918-2930. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa129.

Collateral Toxicity Limits the Evolution of Bacterial Release Factor 2 toward 
Total Omnipotence.

Abdalaal H(1), Pundir S(2), Ge X(2), Sanyal S(2), Näsvall J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

When new genes evolve through modification of existing genes, there are often 
tradeoffs between the new and original functions, making gene duplication and 
amplification necessary to buffer deleterious effects on the original function. 
We have used experimental evolution of a bacterial strain lacking peptide 
release factor 1 (RF1) in order to study how peptide release factor 2 (RF2) 
evolves to compensate the loss of RF1. As expected, amplification of the 
RF2-encoding gene prfB to high copy number was a rapid initial response, 
followed by the appearance of mutations in RF2 and other components of the 
translation machinery. Characterization of the evolved RF2 variants by their 
effects on bacterial growth rate, reporter gene expression, and in vitro 
translation termination reveals a complex picture of reduced discrimination 
between the cognate and near-cognate stop codons and highlights a functional 
tradeoff that we term "collateral toxicity." We suggest that this type of 
tradeoff may be a more serious obstacle in new gene evolution than the more 
commonly discussed evolutionary tradeoffs between "old" and "new" functions of a 
gene, as it cannot be overcome by gene copy number changes. Further, we suggest 
a model for how RF2 autoregulation responds to alterations in the demand not 
only for RF2 activity but also for RF1 activity.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa129
PMCID: PMC7530605
PMID: 32437534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1245. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2857-2864. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa123.

Ancient Genomic Regulatory Blocks Are a Source for Regulatory Gene Deserts in 
Vertebrates after Whole-Genome Duplications.

Touceda-Suárez M(1), Kita EM(1), Acemel RD(2), Firbas PN(2), Magri MS(2), 
Naranjo S(2), Tena JJ(2), Gómez-Skarmeta JL(2), Maeso I(2), Irimia M(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, pain.
(2)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD), CSIC-Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide-Junta de Andalucía, Seville, Spain.
(3)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)ICREA, Barcelona, Spain.

We investigated how the two rounds of whole-genome duplication that occurred at 
the base of the vertebrate lineage have impacted ancient microsyntenic 
associations involving developmental regulators (known as genomic regulatory 
blocks, GRBs). We showed that the majority of GRBs identified in the last common 
ancestor of chordates have been maintained as a single copy in humans. We found 
evidence that dismantling of the duplicated GRB copies occurred early in 
vertebrate evolution often through the differential retention of the regulatory 
gene but loss of the bystander gene's exonic sequences. Despite the large 
evolutionary scale, the presence of duplicated highly conserved noncoding 
regions provided unambiguous proof for this scenario for multiple ancient GRBs. 
Remarkably, the dismantling of ancient GRB duplicates has contributed to the 
creation of large gene deserts associated with regulatory genes in vertebrates, 
providing a potentially widespread mechanism for the origin of these enigmatic 
genomic traits.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa123
PMCID: PMC7530604
PMID: 32421818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1246. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2875-2886. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa125.

The Evolution of Human Cancer Gene Duplications across Mammals.

Tollis M(1)(2), Schneider-Utaka AK(3), Maley CC(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Informatics, Computing, and Cyber Systems, Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, AZ.
(2)Arizona Cancer Evolution Center, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.

Cancer is caused by genetic alterations that affect cellular fitness, and 
multicellular organisms have evolved mechanisms to suppress cancer such as cell 
cycle checkpoints and apoptosis. These pathways may be enhanced by the addition 
of tumor suppressor gene paralogs or deletion of oncogenes. To provide insights 
to the evolution of cancer suppression across the mammalian radiation, we 
estimated copy numbers for 548 human tumor suppressor gene and oncogene homologs 
in 63 mammalian genome assemblies. The naked mole rat contained the most cancer 
gene copies, consistent with the extremely low rates of cancer found in this 
species. We found a positive correlation between a species' cancer gene copy 
number and its longevity, but not body size, contrary to predictions from Peto's 
Paradox. Extremely long-lived mammals also contained more copies of caretaker 
genes in their genomes, suggesting that the maintenance of genome integrity is 
an essential form of cancer prevention in long-lived species. We found the 
strongest association between longevity and copy numbers of genes that are both 
germline and somatic tumor suppressor genes, suggesting that selection has acted 
to suppress both hereditary and sporadic cancers. We also found a strong 
relationship between the number of tumor suppressor genes and the number of 
oncogenes in mammalian genomes, suggesting that complex regulatory networks 
mediate the balance between cell proliferation and checks on tumor progression. 
This study is the first to investigate cancer gene expansions across the 
mammalian radiation and provides a springboard for potential human therapies 
based on evolutionary medicine.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa125
PMCID: PMC7530603
PMID: 32421773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1247. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2865-2874. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa124.

Physical Constraints on Epistasis.

Husain K(1), Murugan A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Living systems evolve one mutation at a time, but a single mutation can alter 
the effect of subsequent mutations. The underlying mechanistic determinants of 
such epistasis are unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the physical dynamics of a 
biological system can generically constrain epistasis. We analyze models and 
experimental data on proteins and regulatory networks. In each, we find that if 
the long-time physical dynamics is dominated by a slow, collective mode, then 
the dimensionality of mutational effects is reduced. Consequently, epistatic 
coefficients for different combinations of mutations are no longer independent, 
even if individually strong. Such epistasis can be summarized as resulting from 
a global nonlinearity applied to an underlying linear trait, that is, as global 
epistasis. This constraint, in turn, reduces the ruggedness of the 
sequence-to-function map. By providing a generic mechanistic origin for 
experimentally observed global epistasis, our work suggests that slow collective 
physical modes can make biological systems evolvable.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa124
PMID: 32421772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1248. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2838-2856. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa122.

The Architecture of Metabolism Maximizes Biosynthetic Diversity in the Largest 
Class of Fungi.

Gluck-Thaler E(1)(2), Haridas S(3), Binder M(4), Grigoriev IV(3)(5), Crous 
PW(6), Spatafora JW(7), Bushley K(8), Slot JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(3)US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA.
(4)TechBase, R-Tech GmbH, Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
(6)Westerdijk Fungal Biodiversity Institute, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR.
(8)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN.

Ecological diversity in fungi is largely defined by metabolic traits, including 
the ability to produce secondary or "specialized" metabolites (SMs) that mediate 
interactions with other organisms. Fungal SM pathways are frequently encoded in 
biosynthetic gene clusters (BGCs), which facilitate the identification and 
characterization of metabolic pathways. Variation in BGC composition reflects 
the diversity of their SM products. Recent studies have documented surprising 
diversity of BGC repertoires among isolates of the same fungal species, yet 
little is known about how this population-level variation is inherited across 
macroevolutionary timescales. Here, we applied a novel linkage-based algorithm 
to reveal previously unexplored dimensions of diversity in BGC composition, 
distribution, and repertoire across 101 species of Dothideomycetes, which are 
considered the most phylogenetically diverse class of fungi and known to produce 
many SMs. We predicted both complementary and overlapping sets of clustered 
genes compared with existing methods and identified novel gene pairs that 
associate with known secondary metabolite genes. We found that variation among 
sets of BGCs in individual genomes is due to nonoverlapping BGC combinations and 
that several BGCs have biased ecological distributions, consistent with 
niche-specific selection. We observed that total BGC diversity scales linearly 
with increasing repertoire size, suggesting that secondary metabolites have 
little structural redundancy in individual fungi. We project that there is 
substantial unsampled BGC diversity across specific families of Dothideomycetes, 
which will provide a roadmap for future sampling efforts. Our approach and 
findings lend new insight into how BGC diversity is generated and maintained 
across an entire fungal taxonomic class.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa122
PMCID: PMC7530617
PMID: 32421770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1249. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2679-2690. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa121.

Molecular Signatures of Placentation and Secretion Uncovered in Poeciliopsis 
Maternal Follicles.

Guernsey MW(1), van Kruistum H(2), Reznick DN(3), Pollux BJA(2), Baker JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(2)Department of Animal Sciences, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biology, University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA.

Placentation evolved many times independently in vertebrates. Although the core 
functions of all placentas are similar, we know less about how this similarity 
extends to the molecular level. Here, we study Poeciliopsis, a unique genus of 
live-bearing fish that have independently evolved complex placental structures 
at least three times. The maternal follicle is a key component of these 
structures. It envelops yolk-rich eggs and is morphologically simple in 
lecithotrophic species but has elaborate villous structures in matrotrophic 
species. Through sequencing, the follicle transcriptome of a matrotrophic, 
Poeciliopsis retropinna, and lecithotrophic, P. turrubarensis, species we found 
genes known to be critical for placenta function expressed in both species 
despite their difference in complexity. Additionally, when we compare the 
transcriptome of different river populations of P. retropinna, known to vary in 
maternal provisioning, we find differential expression of secretory genes 
expressed specifically in the top layer of villi cells in the maternal follicle. 
This provides some of the first evidence that the placental structures of 
Poeciliopsis function using a secretory mechanism rather than direct contact 
with maternal circulation. Finally, when we look at the expression of placenta 
proteins at the maternal-fetal interface of a larger sampling of Poeciliopsis 
species, we find expression of key maternal and fetal placenta proteins in their 
cognate tissue types of all species, but follicle expression of prolactin is 
restricted to only matrotrophic species. Taken together, we suggest that all 
Poeciliopsis follicles are poised for placenta function but require expression 
of key genes to form secretory villi.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa121
PMCID: PMC7475030
PMID: 32421768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1250. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2661-2678. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa120.

Genomic Analysis of European Drosophila melanogaster Populations Reveals 
Longitudinal Structure, Continent-Wide Selection, and Previously Unknown DNA 
Viruses.

Kapun M(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Barrón MG(1)(6), Staubach F(1)(7), Obbard DJ(1)(8), 
Wiberg RAW(1)(9)(10), Vieira J(1)(11)(12), Goubert C(1)(13)(14), Rota-Stabelli 
O(1)(15), Kankare M(1)(16), Bogaerts-Márquez M(1)(6), Haudry A(1)(13), Waidele 
L(1)(7), Kozeretska I(1)(17)(18), Pasyukova EG(1)(19), Loeschcke V(1)(20), 
Pascual M(1)(21)(22), Vieira CP(1)(11)(12), Serga S(1)(17), Montchamp-Moreau 
C(1)(23), Abbott J(1)(24), Gibert P(1)(13), Porcelli D(1)(25), Posnien N(1)(26), 
Sánchez-Gracia A(1)(21)(22), Grath S(1)(27), Sucena É(1)(28)(29), Bergland 
AO(1)(30), Guerreiro MPG(1)(31), Onder BS(1)(32), Argyridou E(1)(27), Guio 
L(1)(6), Schou MF(1)(20)(24), Deplancke B(1)(33), Vieira C(1)(13), Ritchie 
MG(1)(9), Zwaan BJ(1)(34), Tauber E(1)(35)(36), Orengo DJ(1)(21)(22), Puerma 
E(1)(21)(22), Aguadé M(1)(21)(22), Schmidt P(1)(37), Parsch J(1)(27), Betancourt 
AJ(1)(38), Flatt T(1)(2)(3), González J(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)The European Drosophila Population Genomics Consortium (DrosEU).
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, Medical University of Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria.
(6)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, CSIC-Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(7)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Ecology, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(8)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(9)Centre for Biological Diversity, School of Biology, University of St. 
Andrews, St Andrews, Scotland.
(10)Department of Environmental Sciences, Zoological Institute, University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(11)Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular (IBMC), University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(12)Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (I3S), University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(13)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Evolutive UMR 5558, CNRS, Université 
Lyon 1, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France.
(14)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY.
(15)Research and Innovation Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach, San Michele all' 
Adige, Italy.
(16)Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyväskylä, 
Jyväskylä, Finland.
(17)General and Medical Genetics Department, Taras Shevchenko National 
University of Kyiv, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(18)State Institution National Antarctic Scientific Center of Ministry of 
Education and Science of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
(19)Laboratory of Genome Variation, Institute of Molecular Genetics of RAS, 
Moscow, Russia.
(20)Department of Bioscience-Genetics, Ecology and Evolution, Aarhus University, 
Aarhus C, Denmark.
(21)Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística, Facultat de Biologia, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(22)Institut de Recerca de la Biodiversitat (IRBio), Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(23)Université Paris-Saclay, CNRS, IRD, UMR Évolution, Génomes, Comportement et 
Écologie, 91198, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(24)Section for Evolutionary Ecology, Department of Biology, Lund University, 
Lund, Sweden.
(25)Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
(26)Johann-Friedrich-Blumenbach-Institut für Zoologie und Anthropologie, 
Universität Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(27)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Planegg, Germany.
(28)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
(29)Departamento de Biologia Animal, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de 
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
(30)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
(31)Departament de Genètica i Microbiologia, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(32)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Hacettepe University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(33)Institute of Bio-engineering, School of Life Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(34)Laboratory of Genetics, Department of Plant Sciences, Wageningen University, 
Wageningen, Netherlands.
(35)Department of Evolutionary and Environmental Biology, University of Haifa, 
Haifa, Israel.
(36)Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(37)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(38)Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Behaviour, University of Liverpool, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Genetic variation is the fuel of evolution, with standing genetic variation 
especially important for short-term evolution and local adaptation. To date, 
studies of spatiotemporal patterns of genetic variation in natural populations 
have been challenging, as comprehensive sampling is logistically difficult, and 
sequencing of entire populations costly. Here, we address these issues using a 
collaborative approach, sequencing 48 pooled population samples from 32 
locations, and perform the first continent-wide genomic analysis of genetic 
variation in European Drosophila melanogaster. Our analyses uncover longitudinal 
population structure, provide evidence for continent-wide selective sweeps, 
identify candidate genes for local climate adaptation, and document clines in 
chromosomal inversion and transposable element frequencies. We also characterize 
variation among populations in the composition of the fly microbiome, and 
identify five new DNA viruses in our samples.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa120
PMCID: PMC7475034
PMID: 32413142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1251. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2641-2654. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa117.

Genomic Epidemiology, Evolution, and Transmission Dynamics of Porcine 
Deltacoronavirus.

He WT(1), Ji X(2)(3)(4), He W(1), Dellicour S(5)(6), Wang S(1), Li G(1), Zhang 
L(1), Gilbert M(6), Zhu H(2)(3), Xing G(7), Veit M(8), Huang Z(9), Han GZ(10), 
Huang Y(7), Suchard MA(2)(3), Baele G(5), Lemey P(5), Su S(1).

Author information:
(1)MOE International Joint Collaborative Research Laboratory for Animal Health & 
Food Safety, Jiangsu Engineering Laboratory of Animal Immunology, Institute of 
Immunology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, China.
(2)Departments of Biomathematics and Human Genetics, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
Laboratory for Clinical and Epidemiological Virology, KU Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium.
(6)Spatial Epidemiology Lab (SpELL), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Bruxelles, 
Belgium.
(7)Key Laboratory of Animal Virology of Ministry of Agriculture, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, China.
(8)Institute for Virology, Center for Infection Medicine, Veterinary Faculty, 
Free University Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Zhengzhou New Channel Agricultural Technology Co., Ltd, Zhengzhou, Henan, 
China.
(10)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, College of Life 
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
has shown once again that coronavirus (CoV) in animals are potential sources for 
epidemics in humans. Porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV) is an emerging 
enteropathogen of swine with a worldwide distribution. Here, we implemented and 
described an approach to analyze the epidemiology of PDCoV following its 
emergence in the pig population. We performed an integrated analysis of full 
genome sequence data from 21 newly sequenced viruses, along with comprehensive 
epidemiological surveillance data collected globally over the last 15 years. We 
found four distinct phylogenetic lineages of PDCoV, which differ in their 
geographic circulation patterns. Interestingly, we identified more frequent 
intra- and interlineage recombination and higher virus genetic diversity in the 
Chinese lineages compared with the USA lineage where pigs are raised in 
different farming systems and ecological environments. Most recombination 
breakpoints are located in the ORF1ab gene rather than in genes encoding 
structural proteins. We also identified five amino acids under positive 
selection in the spike protein suggesting a role for adaptive evolution. 
According to structural mapping, three positively selected sites are located in 
the N-terminal domain of the S1 subunit, which is the most likely involved in 
binding to a carbohydrate receptor, whereas the other two are located in or near 
the fusion peptide of the S2 subunit and thus might affect membrane fusion. 
Finally, our phylogeographic investigations highlighted notable South-North 
transmission as well as frequent long-distance dispersal events in China that 
could implicate human-mediated transmission. Our findings provide new insights 
into the evolution and dispersal of PDCoV that contribute to our understanding 
of the critical factors involved in CoVs emergence.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa117
PMCID: PMC7454817
PMID: 32407507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1252. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2630-2640. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa116.

Neuronal Function and Dopamine Signaling Evolve at High Temperature in 
Drosophila.

Jakšić AM(1)(2)(3), Karner J(1), Nolte V(1), Hsu SK(1)(2), Barghi N(1), Mallard 
F(1)(4), Otte KA(1), Svečnjak L(5), Senti KA(1), Schlötterer C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Populationsgenetik, Vetmeduni Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Vienna Graduate School of Population Genetics, Vetmeduni Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, NY.
(4)Institut de Biologie de l'École Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Fisheries, Apiculture, Wildlife Management and Special Zoology, 
Faculty of Agriculture, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

Neuronal activity is temperature sensitive and affects behavioral traits 
important for individual fitness, such as locomotion and courtship. Yet, we do 
not know enough about the evolutionary response of neuronal phenotypes in new 
temperature environments. Here, we use long-term experimental evolution of 
Drosophila simulans populations exposed to novel temperature regimes. Here, we 
demonstrate a direct relationship between thermal selective pressure and the 
evolution of neuronally expressed molecular and behavioral phenotypes. Several 
essential neuronal genes evolve lower expression at high temperatures and higher 
expression at low temperatures, with dopaminergic neurons standing out by 
displaying the most consistent expression change across independent replicates. 
We functionally validate the link between evolved gene expression and behavioral 
changes by pharmacological intervention in the experimentally evolved 
D. simulans populations as well as by genetically triggered expression changes 
of key genes in D. melanogaster. As natural temperature clines confirm our 
results for Drosophila and Anopheles populations, we conclude that neuronal 
dopamine evolution is a key factor for temperature adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa116
PMID: 32402077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1253. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):3023-3046. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa115.

A Likelihood Approach for Uncovering Selective Sweep Signatures from Haplotype 
Data.

Harris AM(1)(2), DeGiorgio M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(2)Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Biosciences, Huck Institutes of the Life 
Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(3)Department of Computer and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 
Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL.

Selective sweeps are frequent and varied signatures in the genomes of natural 
populations, and detecting them is consequently important in understanding 
mechanisms of adaptation by natural selection. Following a selective sweep, 
haplotypic diversity surrounding the site under selection decreases, and this 
deviation from the background pattern of variation can be applied to identify 
sweeps. Multiple methods exist to locate selective sweeps in the genome from 
haplotype data, but none leverages the power of a model-based approach to make 
their inference. Here, we propose a likelihood ratio test statistic T to probe 
whole-genome polymorphism data sets for selective sweep signatures. Our 
framework uses a simple but powerful model of haplotype frequency spectrum 
distortion to find sweeps and additionally make an inference on the number of 
presently sweeping haplotypes in a population. We found that the T statistic is 
suitable for detecting both hard and soft sweeps across a variety of demographic 
models, selection strengths, and ages of the beneficial allele. Accordingly, we 
applied the T statistic to variant calls from European and sub-Saharan African 
human populations, yielding primarily literature-supported candidates, including 
LCT, RSPH3, and ZNF211 in CEU, SYT1, RGS18, and NNT in YRI, and HLA genes in 
both populations. We also searched for sweep signatures in Drosophila 
melanogaster, finding expected candidates at Ace, Uhg1, and Pimet. Finally, we 
provide open-source software to compute the T statistic and the inferred number 
of presently sweeping haplotypes from whole-genome data.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa115
PMCID: PMC7530616
PMID: 32392293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1254. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2747-2762. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa114.

Phylogenetic Reconstruction Based on Synteny Block and Gene Adjacencies.

Drillon G(1), Champeimont R(1), Oteri F(1), Fischer G(1), Carbone A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, IBPS, Laboratoire de Biologie Computationnelle et 
Quantitative-UMR 7238, Paris, France, Paris, France.
(2)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France.

Gene order can be used as an informative character to reconstruct phylogenetic 
relationships between species independently from the local information present 
in gene/protein sequences. PhyChro is a reconstruction method based on 
chromosomal rearrangements, applicable to a wide range of eukaryotic genomes 
with different gene contents and levels of synteny conservation. For each 
synteny breakpoint issued from pairwise genome comparisons, the algorithm 
defines two disjoint sets of genomes, named partial splits, respectively, 
supporting the two block adjacencies defining the breakpoint. Considering all 
partial splits issued from all pairwise comparisons, a distance between two 
genomes is computed from the number of partial splits separating them. Tree 
reconstruction is achieved through a bottom-up approach by iteratively grouping 
sister genomes minimizing genome distances. PhyChro estimates branch lengths 
based on the number of synteny breakpoints and provides confidence scores for 
the branches. PhyChro performance is evaluated on two data sets of 13 
vertebrates and 21 yeast genomes by using up to 130,000 and 179,000 breakpoints, 
respectively, a scale of genomic markers that has been out of reach until now. 
PhyChro reconstructs very accurate tree topologies even at known problematic 
branching positions. Its robustness has been benchmarked for different synteny 
block reconstruction methods. On simulated data PhyChro reconstructs phylogenies 
perfectly in almost all cases, and shows the highest accuracy compared with 
other existing tools. PhyChro is very fast, reconstructing the vertebrate and 
yeast phylogenies in <15 min.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa114
PMCID: PMC7475045
PMID: 32384156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1255. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2616-2629. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa113.

Ancient Hybridization with an Unknown Population Facilitated High-Altitude 
Adaptation of Canids.

Wang MS(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang S(1)(2), Li Y(5), Jhala Y(6), Thakur M(7), Otecko 
NO(1)(2), Si JF(8), Chen HM(1), Shapiro B(3)(4), Nielsen R(9)(10), Zhang 
YP(1)(5)(11), Wu DD(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming, China.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa 
Cruz, CA.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California 
Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resource, Yunnan 
University, Kunming, China.
(6)Wildlife Institute of India, Chandrabani, Dehradun, Uttarakhand, India.
(7)Zoological Survey of India, New Alipore, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(8)Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of 
Agriculture of China, National Engineering Laboratory for Animal Breeding, 
College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural University, 
Beijing, China.
(9)Departments of Integrative Biology and Statistics, University of California 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
(10)Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(11)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

Genetic introgression not only provides material for adaptive evolution but also 
confounds our understanding of evolutionary history. This is particularly true 
for canids, a species complex in which genome sequencing and analysis has 
revealed a complex history of admixture and introgression. Here, we sequence 19 
new whole genomes from high-altitude Tibetan and Himalayan wolves and dogs and 
combine these into a larger data set of 166 whole canid genomes. Using these 
data, we explore the evolutionary history and adaptation of these and other 
canid lineages. We find that Tibetan and Himalayan wolves are closely related to 
each other, and that ∼39% of their nuclear genome is derived from an 
as-yet-unrecognized wolf-like lineage that is deeply diverged from living 
Holarctic wolves and dogs. The EPAS1 haplotype, which is present at high 
frequencies in Tibetan dog breeds and wolves and confers an adaptive advantage 
to animals living at high altitudes, was probably derived from this ancient 
lineage. Our study underscores the complexity of canid evolution and 
demonstrates how admixture and introgression can shape the evolutionary 
trajectories of species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa113
PMID: 32384152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1256. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2691-2698. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa112.

Human Prehistoric Demography Revealed by the Polymorphic Pattern of CpG 
Transitions.

Liu X(1).

Author information:
(1)USF Genomics & College of Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, 
FL.

The prehistoric demography of human populations is an essential piece of 
information for illustrating our evolution. Despite its importance and the 
advancement of ancient DNA studies, our knowledge of human evolution is still 
limited, which is also the case for relatively recent population dynamics during 
and around the Holocene. Here, we inferred detailed demographic histories from 1 
to 40 ka for 24 population samples using an improved model-flexible method with 
36 million genome-wide noncoding CpG sites. Our results showed many population 
growth events that were likely due to the Neolithic Revolution (i.e., the shift 
from hunting and gathering to agriculture and settlement). Our results help to 
provide a clearer picture of human prehistoric demography, confirming the 
significant impact of agriculture on population expansion, and provide new 
hypotheses and directions for future research.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa112
PMCID: PMC7820361
PMID: 32369585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1257. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2727-2733. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa106.

New Methods to Calculate Concordance Factors for Phylogenomic Datasets.

Minh BQ(1)(2), Hahn MW(3)(4), Lanfear R(2).

Author information:
(1)Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University, 
Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Research School of Biology, Australian 
National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(3)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.

We implement two measures for quantifying genealogical concordance in 
phylogenomic data sets: the gene concordance factor (gCF) and the novel site 
concordance factor (sCF). For every branch of a reference tree, gCF is defined 
as the percentage of "decisive" gene trees containing that branch. This measure 
is already in wide usage, but here we introduce a package that calculates it 
while accounting for variable taxon coverage among gene trees. sCF is a new 
measure defined as the percentage of decisive sites supporting a branch in the 
reference tree. gCF and sCF complement classical measures of branch support in 
phylogenetics by providing a full description of underlying disagreement among 
loci and sites. An easy to use implementation and tutorial is freely available 
in the IQ-TREE software package (http://www.iqtree.org/doc/Concordance-Factor, 
last accessed May 13, 2020).

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa106
PMCID: PMC7475031
PMID: 32365179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1258. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2155-2172. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa096.

Evolution of Sequence-Diverse Disordered Regions in a Protein Family: Order 
within the Chaos.

Shafee T(1), Bacic A(1)(2), Johnson K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal, Plant and Soil Sciences, La Trobe Institute for 
Agriculture & Food, La Trobe University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(2)Sino-Australia Plant Cell Wall Research Centre, College of Forestry and 
Biotechnology, Zhejiang Agriculture and Forestry University, Lin'an, Hangzhou, 
China.

Approaches for studying the evolution of globular proteins are now well 
established yet are unsuitable for disordered sequences. Our understanding of 
the evolution of proteins containing disordered regions therefore lags that of 
globular proteins, limiting our capacity to estimate their evolutionary history, 
classify paralogs, and identify potential sequence-function relationships. Here, 
we overcome these limitations by using new analytical approaches that project 
representations of sequence space to dissect the evolution of proteins with both 
ordered and disordered regions, and the correlated changes between these. We use 
the fasciclin-like arabinogalactan proteins (FLAs) as a model family, since they 
contain a variable number of globular fasciclin domains as well as several 
distinct types of disordered regions: proline (Pro)-rich arabinogalactan (AG) 
regions and longer Pro-depleted regions. Sequence space projections of fasciclin 
domains from 2019 FLAs from 78 species identified distinct clusters 
corresponding to different types of fasciclin domains. Clusters can be similarly 
identified in the seemingly random Pro-rich AG and Pro-depleted disordered 
regions. Sequence features of the globular and disordered regions clearly 
correlate with one another, implying coevolution of these distinct regions, as 
well as with the N-linked and O-linked glycosylation motifs. We reconstruct the 
overall evolutionary history of the FLAs, annotated with the changing domain 
architectures, glycosylation motifs, number and length of AG regions, and 
disordered region sequence features. Mapping these features onto the 
functionally characterized FLAs therefore enables their sequence-function 
relationships to be interrogated. These findings will inform research on the 
abundant disordered regions in protein families from all kingdoms of life.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa096
PMID: 32359163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1259. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2734-2746. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa111.

Model-Based Detection of Whole-Genome Duplications in a Phylogeny.

Zwaenepoel A(1)(2)(3), Van de Peer Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Bioinformatics Institute Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.

Ancient whole-genome duplications (WGDs) leave signatures in comparative genomic 
data sets that can be harnessed to detect these events of presumed evolutionary 
importance. Current statistical approaches for the detection of ancient WGDs in 
a phylogenetic context have two main drawbacks. The first is that unwarranted 
restrictive assumptions on the "background" gene duplication and loss rates make 
inferences unreliable in the face of model violations. The second is that most 
methods can only be used to examine a limited set of a priori selected WGD 
hypotheses and cannot be used to discover WGDs in a phylogeny. In this study, we 
develop an approach for WGD inference using gene count data that seeks to 
overcome both issues. We employ a phylogenetic birth-death model that includes 
WGD in a flexible hierarchical Bayesian approach and use reversible-jump Markov 
chain Monte Carlo to perform Bayesian inference of branch-specific duplication, 
loss, and WGD retention rates across the space of WGD configurations. We 
evaluate the proposed method using simulations, apply it to data sets from 
flowering plants, and discuss the statistical intricacies of model-based WGD 
inference.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa111
PMCID: PMC7116244
PMID: 32359154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1260. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2601-2615. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa110.

Selection following Gene Duplication Shapes Recent Genome Evolution in the Pea 
Aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum.

Fernández R(1)(2), Marcet-Houben M(1)(3)(4), Legeai F(5)(6), Richard G(5)(7), 
Robin S(5)(8), Wucher V(1), Pegueroles C(1)(3)(4), Gabaldón T(1)(3)(9)(10)(4), 
Tagu D(5).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute for Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Animal Biodiversity and Evolution, Institute of Evolutionary Biology 
(CSIC-UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Life Sciences, Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)IGEPP, INRAE, Agrocampus Ouest, Université de Rennes 1, Le Rheu, France.
(6)INRIA, IRISA, Genscale, Campus Beaulieu, Rennes, France.
(7)Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics, Freiburg im Breisgau, 
Germany.
(8)INRIA, IRISA, GenOuest Core Facility, Campus Beaulieu, Rennes, France.
(9)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.

Ecology of insects is as wide as their diversity, which reflects their high 
capacity of adaptation in most of the environments of our planet. Aphids, with 
over 4,000 species, have developed a series of adaptations including a high 
phenotypic plasticity and the ability to feed on the phloem sap of plants, which 
is enriched in sugars derived from photosynthesis. Recent analyses of aphid 
genomes have indicated a high level of shared ancestral gene duplications that 
might represent a basis for genetic innovation and broad adaptations. In 
addition, there are a large number of recent, species-specific gene duplications 
whose role in adaptation remains poorly understood. Here, we tested whether 
duplicates specific to the pea aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum are related to genomic 
innovation by combining comparative genomics, transcriptomics, and chromatin 
accessibility analyses. Consistent with large levels of neofunctionalization, we 
found that most of the recent pairs of gene duplicates evolved asymmetrically, 
showing divergent patterns of positive selection and gene expression. Genes 
under selection involved a plethora of biological functions, suggesting that 
neofunctionalization and tissue specificity, among other evolutionary 
mechanisms, have orchestrated the evolution of recent paralogs in the pea aphid 
and may have facilitated host-symbiont cooperation. Our comprehensive 
phylogenomics analysis allowed us to tackle the history of duplicated genes to 
pave the road toward understanding the role of gene duplication in ecological 
adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa110
PMCID: PMC7475028
PMID: 32359152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1261. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2520-2530. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa101.

Pervasive Phenotypic Impact of a Large Nonrecombining Introgressed Region in 
Yeast.

Brion C(1), Caradec C(1), Pflieger D(1), Friedrich A(1), Schacherer J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, GMGM UMR 7156, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), Paris, France.

To explore the origin of the diversity observed in natural populations, many 
studies have investigated the relationship between genotype and phenotype. In 
yeast species, especially in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, these studies are mainly 
conducted using recombinant offspring derived from two genetically diverse 
isolates, allowing to define the phenotypic effect of genetic variants. However, 
large genomic variants such as interspecies introgressions are usually 
overlooked even if they are known to modify the genotype-phenotype relationship. 
To have a better insight into the overall phenotypic impact of introgressions, 
we took advantage of the presence of a 1-Mb introgressed region, which lacks 
recombination and contains the mating-type determinant in the Lachancea kluyveri 
budding yeast. By performing linkage mapping analyses in this species, we 
identified a total of 89 loci affecting growth fitness in a large number of 
conditions and 2,187 loci affecting gene expression mostly grouped into two 
major hotspots, one being the introgressed region carrying the mating-type 
locus. Because of the absence of recombination, our results highlight the 
presence of a sexual dimorphism in a budding yeast for the first time. Overall, 
by describing the phenotype-genotype relationship in the Lachancea kluyveri 
species, we expanded our knowledge on how genetic characteristics of large 
introgression events can affect the phenotypic landscape.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa101
PMCID: PMC7475044
PMID: 32359150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1262. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2549-2567. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa107.

Degradation of the Repetitive Genomic Landscape in a Close Relative of 
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Woodruff GC(1), Teterina AA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR.
(2)Center of Parasitology, Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution RAS, 
Moscow, Russia.

The abundance, diversity, and genomic distribution of repetitive elements is 
highly variable among species. These patterns are thought to be driven in part 
by reproductive mode and the interaction of selection and recombination, and 
recombination rates typically vary by chromosomal position. In the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans, repetitive elements are enriched at chromosome arms and 
depleted on centers, and this mirrors the chromosomal distributions of other 
genomic features such as recombination rate. How conserved is this genomic 
landscape of repeats, and what evolutionary forces maintain it? To address this, 
we compared the genomic organization of repetitive elements across five 
Caenorhabditis species with chromosome-level assemblies. As previously reported, 
repeat content is enriched on chromosome arms in most Caenorhabditis species, 
and no obvious patterns of repeat content associated with reproductive mode were 
observed. However, the fig-associated C. inopinata has experienced repetitive 
element expansion and reveals no association of global repeat density with 
chromosome position. Patterns of repeat superfamily specific distributions 
reveal this global pattern is driven largely by a few repeat superfamilies that 
in C. inopinata have expanded in number and have weak associations with 
chromosome position. Additionally, 15% of predicted protein-coding genes in 
C. inopinata align to transposon-related proteins. When these are excluded, 
C. inopinata has no enrichment of genes in chromosome centers, in contrast to 
its close relatives who all have such clusters. Forward evolutionary simulations 
reveal that chromosomal heterogeneity in recombination rate alone can generate 
structured repetitive genomic landscapes when insertions are weakly deleterious, 
whereas chromosomal heterogeneity in the fitness effects of transposon insertion 
can promote such landscapes across a variety of evolutionary scenarios. Thus, 
patterns of gene density along chromosomes likely contribute to global 
repetitive landscapes in this group, although other historical or genomic 
factors are needed to explain the idiosyncrasy of genomic organization of 
various transposable element taxa within C. inopinata. Taken together, these 
results highlight the power of comparative genomics and evolutionary simulations 
in testing hypotheses regarding the causes of genome organization.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa107
PMCID: PMC7475029
PMID: 32359146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1263. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2584-2600. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa109.

Understanding the Early Evolutionary Stages of a 
Tandem Drosophilamelanogaster-Specific Gene Family: A Structural and Functional 
Population Study.

Clifton BD(1), Jimenez J(1), Kimura A(1), Chahine Z(1), Librado P(2), 
Sánchez-Gracia A(3)(4), Abbassi M(1), Carranza F(1), Chan C(1), Marchetti 
M(5)(6), Zhang W(7), Shi M(7), Vu C(1), Yeh S(1)(8), Fanti L(5)(6), Xia XQ(7), 
Rozas J(3)(4), Ranz JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California 
Irvine, Irvine, CA.
(2)Laboratoire AMIS CNRS UMR 5288, Faculté de Médicine de Purpan, Université 
Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
(3)Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadistica, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institut de Recerca de la Biodiversitat, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(5)Istituto Pasteur Italia, Fondazione Cenci-Bolognetti, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "C. Darwin", Sapienza University of 
Rome, Rome, Italy.
(7)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei 
Province, China.
(8)Department of Life Sciences, National Central University, Taoyuan City, 
Zhongli District, Taiwan.

Gene families underlie genetic innovation and phenotypic diversification. 
However, our understanding of the early genomic and functional evolution of 
tandemly arranged gene families remains incomplete as paralog sequence 
similarity hinders their accurate characterization. The Drosophila 
melanogaster-specific gene family Sdic is tandemly repeated and impacts sperm 
competition. We scrutinized Sdic in 20 geographically diverse populations using 
reference-quality genome assemblies, read-depth methodologies, and qPCR, finding 
that ∼90% of the individuals harbor 3-7 copies as well as evidence of population 
differentiation. In strains with reliable gene annotations, copy number 
variation (CNV) and differential transposable element insertions distinguish one 
structurally distinct version of the Sdic region per strain. All 31 annotated 
copies featured protein-coding potential and, based on the protein variant 
encoded, were categorized into 13 paratypes differing in their 3' ends, with 3-5 
paratypes coexisting in any strain examined. Despite widespread gene conversion, 
the only copy present in all strains has functionally diverged at both coding 
and regulatory levels under positive selection. Contrary to artificial tandem 
duplications of the Sdic region that resulted in increased male expression, CNV 
in cosmopolitan strains did not correlate with expression levels, likely as a 
result of differential genome modifier composition. Duplicating the region did 
not enhance sperm competitiveness, suggesting a fitness cost at high expression 
levels or a plateau effect. Beyond facilitating a minimally optimal expression 
level, Sdic CNV acts as a catalyst of protein and regulatory diversity, 
showcasing a possible evolutionary path recently formed tandem multigene 
families can follow toward long-term consolidation in eukaryotic genomes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa109
PMCID: PMC7475035
PMID: 32359138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1264. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2568-2583. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa108.

Adaptive Introgression across Semipermeable Species Boundaries between Local 
Helicoverpa zea and Invasive Helicoverpa armigera Moths.

Valencia-Montoya WA(1)(2), Elfekih S(3)(4), North HL(1), Meier JI(1), Warren 
IA(1), Tay WT(5), Gordon KHJ(5), Specht A(6), Paula-Moraes SV(7), Rane R(3)(4), 
Walsh TK(5), Jiggins CD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
(3)CSIRO Health and Biosecurity, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong, 
VIC, Australia.
(4)Bio21 Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(5)CSIRO Land and Water, Black Mountain Laboratories, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(6)Embrapa Cerrados, Planaltina, Federal District, Brazil.
(7)West Florida Research and Education Center, University of Florida, Jay, FL.

Hybridization between invasive and native species has raised global concern, 
given the dramatic increase in species range shifts and pest outbreaks due to 
anthropogenic dispersal. Nevertheless, secondary contact between sister lineages 
of local and invasive species provides a natural laboratory to understand the 
factors that determine introgression and the maintenance or loss of species 
barriers. Here, we characterize the early evolutionary outcomes following 
secondary contact between invasive Helicoverpa armigera and native H. zea in 
Brazil. We carried out whole-genome resequencing of Helicoverpa moths from 
Brazil in two temporal samples: during the outbreak of H. armigera in 2013 and 
2017. There is evidence for a burst of hybridization and widespread 
introgression from local H. zea into invasive H. armigera coinciding with 
H. armigera expansion in 2013. However, in H. armigera, the admixture proportion 
and the length of introgressed blocks were significantly reduced between 2013 
and 2017, suggesting selection against admixture. In contrast to the genome-wide 
pattern, there was striking evidence for adaptive introgression of a single 
region from the invasive H. armigera into local H. zea, including an insecticide 
resistance allele that increased in frequency over time. In summary, despite 
extensive gene flow after secondary contact, the species boundaries are largely 
maintained except for the single introgressed region containing the 
insecticide-resistant locus. We document the worst-case scenario for an invasive 
species, in which there are now two pest species instead of one, and the native 
species has acquired resistance to pyrethroid insecticides through 
introgression.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa108
PMCID: PMC7475041
PMID: 32348505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1265. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2477-2486. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa093.

Mutations Upstream of the TBX5 and PITX1 Transcription Factor Genes Are 
Associated with Feathered Legs in the Domestic Chicken.

Li J(1)(2), Lee M(1), Davis BW(1), Lamichhaney S(3), Dorshorst BJ(2), Siegel 
PB(2), Andersson L(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
(2)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, VA.
(3)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Feathered leg is a trait in domestic chickens that has undergone intense 
selection by fancy breeders. Previous studies have shown that two major loci 
controlling feathered leg are located on chromosomes 13 and 15. Here, we present 
genetic evidence for the identification of candidate causal mutations at these 
loci. This was accomplished by combining classical linkage mapping using an 
experimental cross segregating for feathered leg and high-resolution 
identical-by-descent mapping using whole-genome sequence data from 167 samples 
of chicken with or without feathered legs. The first predicted causal mutation 
is a single-base change located 25 kb upstream of the gene for the 
forelimb-specific transcription factor TBX5 on chromosome 15. The second is a 
17.7-kb deletion located ∼200 kb upstream of the gene for the hindlimb-specific 
transcription factor PITX1 on chromosome 13. These mutations are predicted to 
activate TBX5 and repress PITX1 expression, respectively. The study reveals a 
remarkable convergence in the evolution of the feathered-leg phenotype in 
domestic chickens and domestic pigeons, as this phenotype is caused by noncoding 
mutations upstream of the same two genes. Furthermore, the PITX1 causal variants 
are large overlapping deletions, 17.7 kb in chicken and 44 kb in pigeons. The 
results of the present study are consistent with the previously proposed model 
for pigeon that feathered leg is caused by reduced PITX1 expression and ectopic 
expression of TBX5 in hindlimb buds resulting in a shift of limb identity from 
hindlimb to more forelimb-like identity.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa093
PMCID: PMC7475036
PMID: 32344431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1266. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2465-2476. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa092.

Parallel Genetic Origin of Foot Feathering in Birds.

Bortoluzzi C(1), Megens HJ(1), Bosse M(1), Derks MFL(1), Dibbits B(1), Laport 
K(1), Weigend S(2), Groenen MAM(1), Crooijmans RPMA(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut (FLI), Institute of Farm Animal Genetics, 
Neustadt, Germany.

Understanding the genetic basis of similar phenotypes shared between lineages is 
a long-lasting research interest. Even though animal evolution offers many 
examples of parallelism, for many phenotypes little is known about the 
underlying genes and mutations. We here use a combination of whole-genome 
sequencing, expression analyses, and comparative genomics to study the parallel 
genetic origin of ptilopody (Pti) in chicken. Ptilopody (or foot feathering) is 
a polygenic trait that can be observed in domesticated and wild avian species 
and is characterized by the partial or complete development of feathers on the 
ankle and feet. In domesticated birds, ptilopody is easily selected to fixation, 
though extensive variation in the type and level of feather development is often 
observed. By means of a genome-wide association analysis, we identified two 
genomic regions associated with ptilopody. At one of the loci, we identified a 
17-kb deletion affecting PITX1 expression, a gene known to encode a 
transcription regulator of hindlimb identity and development. Similarly to 
pigeon, at the second loci, we observed ectopic expression of TBX5, a gene 
involved in forelimb identity and a key determinant of foot feather development. 
We also observed that the trait evolved only once as foot-feathered birds share 
the same haplotype upstream TBX5. Our findings indicate that in chicken and 
pigeon ptilopody is determined by the same set of genes that affect similar 
molecular pathways. Our study confirms that ptilopody has evolved through 
parallel evolution in chicken and pigeon.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa092
PMCID: PMC7475038
PMID: 32344429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1267. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2503-2519. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa099.

Extensive Ethnolinguistic Diversity in Vietnam Reflects Multiple Sources of 
Genetic Diversity.

Liu D(1), Duong NT(2), Ton ND(2), Van Phong N(2), Pakendorf B(3), Van Hai N(2), 
Stoneking M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Institute of Genome Research, Vietnam Academy of Science and Technology, 
Hanoi, Vietnam.
(3)Laboratoire Dynamique du Langage, UMR5596, CNRS & Université de Lyon, Lyon, 
France.

Vietnam features extensive ethnolinguistic diversity and occupies a key position 
in Mainland Southeast Asia. Yet, the genetic diversity of Vietnam remains 
relatively unexplored, especially with genome-wide data, because previous 
studies have focused mainly on the majority Kinh group. Here, we analyze newly 
generated genome-wide single-nucleotide polymorphism data for the Kinh and 21 
additional ethnic groups in Vietnam, encompassing all five major language 
families in Mainland Southeast Asia. In addition to analyzing the allele and 
haplotype sharing within the Vietnamese groups, we incorporate published data 
from both nearby modern populations and ancient samples for comparison. In 
contrast to previous studies that suggested a largely indigenous origin for 
Vietnamese genetic diversity, we find that Vietnamese ethnolinguistic groups 
harbor multiple sources of genetic diversity that likely reflect different 
sources for the ancestry associated with each language family. However, 
linguistic diversity does not completely match genetic diversity: There have 
been extensive interactions between the Hmong-Mien and Tai-Kadai groups; 
different Austro-Asiatic groups show different affinities with other 
ethnolinguistic groups; and we identified a likely case of cultural diffusion in 
which some Austro-Asiatic groups shifted to Austronesian languages during the 
past 2,500 years. Overall, our results highlight the importance of genome-wide 
data from dense sampling of ethnolinguistic groups in providing new insights 
into the genetic diversity and history of an ethnolinguistically diverse region, 
such as Vietnam.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa099
PMCID: PMC7475039
PMID: 32344428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1268. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2394-2413. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa105.

Distinct Expression and Methylation Patterns for Genes with Different Fates 
following a Single Whole-Genome Duplication in Flowering Plants.

Shi T(1)(2), Rahmani RS(3), Gugger PF(4), Wang M(5), Li H(1)(2)(6), Zhang 
Y(1)(2)(6), Li Z(1)(2)(6), Wang Q(1)(2)(7), Van de Peer Y(3)(8)(9)(10), Marchal 
K(3)(11), Chen J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Aquatic Botany and Watershed Ecology, Wuhan Botanical 
Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(2)Center of Conservation Biology, Core Botanical Gardens, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Appalachian Laboratory, University of Maryland Center for Environmental 
Science, Frostburg, MD.
(5)School of Marine Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(7)Sino-African Joint Research Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, 
China.
(8)Centre for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(9)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
(10)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.
(11)Department of Information Technology, IDLab, IMEC, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.

For most sequenced flowering plants, multiple whole-genome duplications (WGDs) 
are found. Duplicated genes following WGD often have different fates that can 
quickly disappear again, be retained for long(er) periods, or subsequently 
undergo small-scale duplications. However, how different expression, epigenetic 
regulation, and functional constraints are associated with these different gene 
fates following a WGD still requires further investigation due to successive 
WGDs in angiosperms complicating the gene trajectories. In this study, we 
investigate lotus (Nelumbo nucifera), an angiosperm with a single WGD during the 
K-pg boundary. Based on improved intraspecific-synteny identification by a 
chromosome-level assembly, transcriptome, and bisulfite sequencing, we explore 
not only the fundamental distinctions in genomic features, expression, and 
methylation patterns of genes with different fates after a WGD but also the 
factors that shape post-WGD expression divergence and expression bias between 
duplicates. We found that after a WGD genes that returned to single copies show 
the highest levels and breadth of expression, gene body methylation, and intron 
numbers, whereas the long-retained duplicates exhibit the highest degrees of 
protein-protein interactions and protein lengths and the lowest methylation in 
gene flanking regions. For those long-retained duplicate pairs, the degree of 
expression divergence correlates with their sequence divergence, degree in 
protein-protein interactions, and expression level, whereas their biases in 
expression level reflecting subgenome dominance are associated with the bias of 
subgenome fractionation. Overall, our study on the paleopolyploid nature of 
lotus highlights the impact of different functional constraints on gene fate and 
duplicate divergence following a single WGD in plant.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa105
PMCID: PMC7403625
PMID: 32343808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1269. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2153-2154. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa053.

Performing Highly Efficient Genome Scans for Local Adaptation with R Package 
pcadapt Version 4.

Privé F(1)(2), Luu K(2), Vilhjálmsson BJ(1), Blum MGB(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Register-Based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(2)University of Grenoble Alpes, Laboratoire TIMC-IMAG, UMR 5525, La Tronche, 
France.
(3)OWKIN France, Paris, France.

R package pcadapt is a user-friendly R package for performing genome scans for 
local adaptation. Here, we present version 4 of pcadapt which substantially 
improves computational efficiency while providing similar results. This 
improvement is made possible by using a different format for storing genotypes 
and a different algorithm for computing principal components of the genotype 
matrix, which is the most computationally demanding step in method pcadapt. 
These changes are seamlessly integrated into the existing pcadapt package, and 
users will experience a large reduction in computation time (by a factor of 
20-60 in our analyses) as compared with previous versions.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa053
PMID: 32343802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1270. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1545-1546. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa019.

Infectious Disease Defenses among Primary Ancient Hominid Contributions to 
Adaptation of Modern Humans.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1420-1433.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa019
PMID: 32330947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1271. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2531-2548. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa104.

Evolution of Human Brain Size-Associated NOTCH2NL Genes Proceeds toward Reduced 
Protein Levels.

Lodewijk GA(1), Fernandes DP(1), Vretzakis I(1), Savage JE(2)(3), Jacobs 
FMJ(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Complex Trait Genetics, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive 
Research, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam Neuroscience, Complex Trait Genetics.

Ever since the availability of genomes from Neanderthals, Denisovans, and 
ancient humans, the field of evolutionary genomics has been searching for 
protein-coding variants that may hold clues to how our species evolved over the 
last ∼600,000 years. In this study, we identify such variants in the 
human-specific NOTCH2NL gene family, which were recently identified as possible 
contributors to the evolutionary expansion of the human brain. We find evidence 
for the existence of unique protein-coding NOTCH2NL variants in Neanderthals and 
Denisovans which could affect their ability to activate Notch signaling. 
Furthermore, in the Neanderthal and Denisovan genomes, we find unusual NOTCH2NL 
configurations, not found in any of the modern human genomes analyzed. Finally, 
genetic analysis of archaic and modern humans reveals ongoing adaptive evolution 
of modern human NOTCH2NL genes, identifying three structural variants acting 
complementary to drive our genome to produce a lower dosage of NOTCH2NL protein. 
Because copy-number variations of the 1q21.1 locus, encompassing NOTCH2NL genes, 
are associated with severe neurological disorders, this seemingly contradicting 
drive toward low levels of NOTCH2NL protein indicates that the optimal dosage of 
NOTCH2NL may have not yet been settled in the human population.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa104
PMCID: PMC7475042
PMID: 32330268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1272. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2099-2109. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa103.

Ancient Genomes Reveal the Evolutionary History and Origin of Cashmere-Producing 
Goats in China.

Cai Y(1), Fu W(1), Cai D(2), Heller R(3), Zheng Z(1), Wen J(1), Li H(1)(4), Wang 
X(1), Alshawi A(5)(6), Sun Z(7), Zhu S(2), Wang J(8), Yang M(7), Hu S(7), Li 
Y(1), Yang Z(1), Gong M(1), Hou Y(1), Lan T(9)(10), Wu K(11)(12), Chen Y(1), 
Jiang Y(1), Wang X(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi 
Province, College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling, China.
(2)Research Center for Chinese Frontier Archaeology, Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.
(3)Section for Computational and RNA Biology, Department of Biology, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Subtropical 
Agro-Bioresources, Guangxi University, Nanning, China.
(5)School of Life Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University 
of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Internal and Preventive Medicine, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Baghdad, Iraqi Ministry of Higher Education and 
Scientific Research, Iraq.
(7)Shaanxi Academy of Archaeology, Xi'an, China.
(8)Henan Provincial Institute of Cultural Heritage and Archaeology, Zhengzhou, 
China.
(9)BGI-Shenzhen, Build 11, Beishan Industrial Zone, Yantian District, Shenzhen, 
China.
(10)Laboratory of Genomics and Molecular Biomedicine, Department of Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(11)China National GeneBank-Shenzhen, BGI-Shenzhen, China.
(12)Cancer Institute, BGI-Research, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China.

Goats are one of the most widespread farmed animals across the world; however, 
their migration route to East Asia and local evolutionary history remain poorly 
understood. Here, we sequenced 27 ancient Chinese goat genomes dating from the 
Late Neolithic period to the Iron Age. We found close genetic affinities between 
ancient and modern Chinese goats, demonstrating their genetic continuity. We 
found that Chinese goats originated from the eastern regions around the Fertile 
Crescent, and we estimated that the ancestors of Chinese goats diverged from 
this population in the Chalcolithic period. Modern Chinese goats were divided 
into a northern and a southern group, coinciding with the most prominent 
climatic division in China, and two genes related to hair follicle development, 
FGF5 and EDA2R, were highly divergent between these populations. We identified a 
likely causal de novo deletion near FGF5 in northern Chinese goats that 
increased to high frequency over time, whereas EDA2R harbored standing variation 
dating to the Neolithic. Our findings add to our understanding of the genetic 
composition and local evolutionary process of Chinese goats.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa103
PMCID: PMC7306693
PMID: 32324877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1273. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2386-2393. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa102.

The Evolutionary Forces Shaping Cis- and Trans-Regulation of Gene Expression 
within a Population of Outcrossing Plants.

Josephs EB(1), Lee YW(2), Wood CW(3), Schoen DJ(4), Wright SI(5), Stinchcombe 
JR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI.
(2)Indigo Ag, Charlestown, MA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(4)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(5)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.

Understanding the persistence of genetic variation within populations has long 
been a goal of evolutionary biology. One promising route toward achieving this 
goal is using population genetic approaches to describe how selection acts on 
the loci associated with trait variation. Gene expression provides a model trait 
for addressing the challenge of the maintenance of variation because it can be 
measured genome-wide without information about how gene expression affects 
traits. Previous work has shown that loci affecting the expression of nearby 
genes (local or cis-eQTLs) are under negative selection, but we lack a clear 
understanding of the selective forces acting on variants that affect the 
expression of genes in trans. Here, we identify loci that affect gene expression 
in trans using genomic and transcriptomic data from one population of the 
obligately outcrossing plant, Capsella grandiflora. The allele frequencies of 
trans-eQTLs are consistent with stronger negative selection acting on 
trans-eQTLs than cis-eQTLs, and stronger negative selection acting on 
trans-eQTLs associated with the expression of multiple genes. However, despite 
this general pattern, we still observe the presence of a trans-eQTL at 
intermediate frequency that affects the expression of a large number of genes in 
the same coexpression module. Overall, our work highlights the different 
selective pressures shaping variation in cis- and trans-regulation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa102
PMID: 32321158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1274. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2332-2340. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa089.

A New Analysis of Archaea-Bacteria Domain Separation: Variable Phylogenetic 
Distance and the Tempo of Early Evolution.

Berkemer SJ(1)(2)(3), McGlynn SE(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Bioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science, University Leipzig, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Competence Center for Scalable Data Services and Solutions, Dresden/Leipzig, 
Germany.
(4)Earth-Life Science Institute, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Meguro, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Seattle, WA.
(6)RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science (CSRS), Saitama, Japan.

Comparative genomics and molecular phylogenetics are foundational for 
understanding biological evolution. Although many studies have been made with 
the aim of understanding the genomic contents of early life, uncertainty 
remains. A study by Weiss et al. (Weiss MC, Sousa FL, Mrnjavac N, Neukirchen S, 
Roettger M, Nelson-Sathi S, Martin WF. 2016. The physiology and habitat of the 
last universal common ancestor. Nat Microbiol. 1(9):16116.) identified a number 
of protein families in the last universal common ancestor of archaea and 
bacteria (LUCA) which were not found in previous works. Here, we report new 
research that suggests the clustering approaches used in this previous study 
undersampled protein families, resulting in incomplete phylogenetic trees which 
do not reflect protein family evolution. Phylogenetic analysis of protein 
families which include more sequence homologs rejects a simple LUCA hypothesis 
based on phylogenetic separation of the bacterial and archaeal domains for a 
majority of the previously identified LUCA proteins (∼82%). To supplement 
limitations of phylogenetic inference derived from incompletely populated 
orthologous groups and to test the hypothesis of a period of rapid evolution 
preceding the separation of the domains, we compared phylogenetic distances both 
within and between domains, for thousands of orthologous groups. We find a 
substantial diversity of interdomain versus intradomain branch lengths, even 
among protein families which exhibit a single domain separating branch and are 
thought to be associated with the LUCA. Additionally, phylogenetic trees with 
long interdomain branches relative to intradomain branches are enriched in 
information categories of protein families in comparison to those associated 
with metabolic functions. These results provide a new view of protein family 
evolution and temper claims about the phenotype and habitat of the LUCA.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa089
PMCID: PMC7403611
PMID: 32316034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1275. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2369-2385. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa098.

A Whole-Genome Scan for Association with Invasion Success in the Fruit Fly 
Drosophila suzukii Using Contrasts of Allele Frequencies Corrected for 
Population Structure.

Olazcuaga L(1), Loiseau A(1), Parrinello H(2), Paris M(3), Fraimout A(1), Guedot 
C(4), Diepenbrock LM(5), Kenis M(6), Zhang J(7), Chen X(8), Borowiec N(9), Facon 
B(10), Vogt H(11), Price DK(12), Vogel H(13), Prud'homme B(3), Estoup A(1), 
Gautier M(1).

Author information:
(1)INRAE, UMR CBGP (INRAE-IRD-Cirad - Montpellier SupAgro), Montferrier-sur-Lez, 
France.
(2)MGX, Biocampus Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM, Universite de Montpellier, 
Montpellier, France.
(3)Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, IBDM, Marseille, France.
(4)Department of Entomology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.
(5)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, NC State University.
(6)CABI, Delémont, Switzerland.
(7)MoA-CABI Joint Laboratory for Bio-Safety, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, BeiXiaGuan, Haidian Qu, China.
(8)College of Plant Protection, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming, Yunnan 
Province, China.
(9)UMR INRAE-CNRS-Université Côte d'Azur Sophia Agrobiotech Institute, Sophia 
Antipolis, France.
(10)UMR Peuplements Végétaux et Bioagresseurs en Milieu Tropical, INRAE, 
Saint-Pierre, La Réunion, France.
(11)Julius Kühn-Institut (JKI), Federal Research Centre for Cultivated Plants, 
Institute for Plant Protection in Fruit Crops and Viticulture, Dossenheim, 
Germany.
(12)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV.
(13)Department of Entomology, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Jena, 
Germany.

Evidence is accumulating that evolutionary changes are not only common during 
biological invasions but may also contribute directly to invasion success. The 
genomic basis of such changes is still largely unexplored. Yet, understanding 
the genomic response to invasion may help to predict the conditions under which 
invasiveness can be enhanced or suppressed. Here, we characterized the genome 
response of the spotted wing drosophila Drosophila suzukii during the worldwide 
invasion of this pest insect species, by conducting a genome-wide association 
study to identify genes involved in adaptive processes during invasion. Genomic 
data from 22 population samples were analyzed to detect genetic variants 
associated with the status (invasive versus native) of the sampled populations 
based on a newly developed statistic, we called C2, that contrasts allele 
frequencies corrected for population structure. We evaluated this new 
statistical framework using simulated data sets and implemented it in an 
upgraded version of the program BayPass. We identified a relatively small set of 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms that show a highly significant association with 
the invasive status of D. suzukii populations. In particular, two genes, 
RhoGEF64C and cpo, contained single-nucleotide polymorphisms significantly 
associated with the invasive status in the two separate main invasion routes of 
D. suzukii. Our methodological approaches can be applied to any other invasive 
species, and more generally to any evolutionary model for species characterized 
by nonequilibrium demographic conditions for which binary covariables of 
interest can be defined at the population level.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa098
PMCID: PMC7403613
PMID: 32302396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1276. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2487-2502. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa097.

Allopolyploid Speciation Accompanied by Gene Flow in a Tree Fern.

Wang J(1)(2), Dong S(1)(2), Yang L(1)(2), Harris A(1)(3), Schneider H(4), Kang 
M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Plant Resources Conservation and Sustainable Utilization, 
South China Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Center of Conservation Biology, Core Botanical Gardens, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Biology, Oberlin College, Oberlin, OH.
(4)Center for Integrative Conservation, Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Menglun, China.

Hybridization in plants may result in hybrid speciation or introgression and, 
thus, is now widely understood to be an important mechanism of species diversity 
on an evolutionary timescale. Hybridization is particularly common in ferns, as 
is polyploidy, which often results from hybrid crosses. Nevertheless, hybrid 
speciation as an evolutionary process in fern lineages remains poorly 
understood. Here, we employ flow cytometry, phylogeny, genomewide single 
nucleotide polymorphism data sets, and admixture and coalescent modeling to show 
that the scaly tree fern, Gymnosphaera metteniana is a naturally occurring 
allotetraploid species derived from hybridization between the diploids, 
G. denticulata and G. gigantea. Moreover, we detected ongoing gene flow between 
the hybrid species and its progenitors, and we found that G. gigantea and 
G. metteniana inhabit distinct niches, whereas climatic niches of G. denticulata 
and G. metteniana largely overlap. Taken together, these results suggest that 
either some degree of intrinsic genetic isolation between the hybrid species and 
its parental progenitors or ecological isolation over short distances may be 
playing an important role in the evolution of reproductive barriers. Historical 
climate change may have facilitated the origin of G. metteniana, with the timing 
of hybridization coinciding with a period of intensification of the East Asian 
monsoon during the Pliocene and Pleistocene periods in southern China. Our study 
of allotetraploid G. metteniana represents the first genomic-level documentation 
of hybrid speciation in scaly tree ferns and, thus, provides a new perspective 
on evolution in the lineage.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa097
PMID: 32302390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1277. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2711-2726. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa100.

Structural Phylogenetics with Confidence.

Malik AJ(1)(2), Poole AM(3)(4)(5), Allison JR(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Theoretical Chemistry and Physics, School of Natural and 
Computational Sciences, Massey University Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Bioinformatics Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 
Singapore.
(3)Bioinformatics Institute, School of Biological Sciences, University of 
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Digital Life Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)Biomolecular Interaction Centre, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New 
Zealand.
(6)Maurice Wilkins Centre for Molecular Biodiscovery, University of Auckland, 
Auckland, New Zealand.

For evaluating the deepest evolutionary relationships among proteins, sequence 
similarity is too low for application of sequence-based homology search or 
phylogenetic methods. In such cases, comparison of protein structures, which are 
often better conserved than sequences, may provide an alternative means of 
uncovering deep evolutionary signal. Although major protein structure databases 
such as SCOP and CATH hierarchically group protein structures, they do not 
describe the specific evolutionary relationships within a hierarchical level. 
Structural phylogenies have the potential to fill this gap. However, it is 
difficult to assess evolutionary relationships derived from structural 
phylogenies without some means of assessing confidence in such trees. We 
therefore address two shortcomings in the application of structural data to deep 
phylogeny. First, we examine whether phylogenies derived from pairwise 
structural comparisons are sensitive to differences in protein length and shape. 
We find that structural phylogenetics is best employed where structures have 
very similar lengths, and that shape fluctuations generated during molecular 
dynamics simulations impact pairwise comparisons, but not so drastically as to 
eliminate evolutionary signal. Second, we address the absence of statistical 
support for structural phylogeny. We present a method for assessing confidence 
in a structural phylogeny using shape fluctuations generated via molecular 
dynamics or Monte Carlo simulations of proteins. Our approach will aid the 
evolutionary reconstruction of relationships across structurally defined protein 
superfamilies. With the Protein Data Bank now containing in excess of 158,000 
entries (December 2019), we predict that structural phylogenetics will become a 
useful tool for ordering the protein universe.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa100
PMCID: PMC7475046
PMID: 32302382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1278. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2699-2705. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa094.

Extreme Genomic CpG Deficiency in SARS-CoV-2 and Evasion of Host Antiviral 
Defense.

Xia X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa178.
    doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa162.

Wild mammalian species, including bats, constitute the natural reservoir of 
betacoronavirus (including SARS, MERS, and the deadly SARS-CoV-2). Different 
hosts or host tissues provide different cellular environments, especially 
different antiviral and RNA modification activities that can alter RNA 
modification signatures observed in the viral RNA genome. The zinc finger 
antiviral protein (ZAP) binds specifically to CpG dinucleotides and recruits 
other proteins to degrade a variety of viral RNA genomes. Many mammalian RNA 
viruses have evolved CpG deficiency. Increasing CpG dinucleotides in these 
low-CpG viral genomes in the presence of ZAP consistently leads to decreased 
viral replication and virulence. Because ZAP exhibits tissue-specific 
expression, viruses infecting different tissues are expected to have different 
CpG signatures, suggesting a means to identify viral tissue-switching events. 
The author shows that SARS-CoV-2 has the most extreme CpG deficiency in all 
known betacoronavirus genomes. This suggests that SARS-CoV-2 may have evolved in 
a new host (or new host tissue) with high ZAP expression. A survey of CpG 
deficiency in viral genomes identified a virulent canine coronavirus 
(alphacoronavirus) as possessing the most extreme CpG deficiency, comparable 
with that observed in SARS-CoV-2. This suggests that the canine tissue infected 
by the canine coronavirus may provide a cellular environment strongly selecting 
against CpG. Thus, viral surveys focused on decreasing CpG in viral RNA genomes 
may provide important clues about the selective environments and viral defenses 
in the original hosts.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa094
PMCID: PMC7184484
PMID: 32289821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1279. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2357-2368. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa095.

The Aphid X Chromosome Is a Dangerous Place for Functionally Important Genes: 
Diverse Evolution of Hemipteran Genomes Based on Chromosome-Level Assemblies.

Li Y(1), Zhang B(1)(2), Moran NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX.
(2)Laboratory of Predatory Mites, Institute of Plant Protection, Chinese Academy 
of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Different evolutionary forces shape gene content and sequence evolution on 
autosomes versus sex chromosomes. Location on a sex chromosome can favor 
male-beneficial or female-beneficial mutations depending on the sex 
determination system and selective pressure on different sexual morphs. An X0 
sex determination can lead to autosomal enrichment of male-biased genes, as 
observed in some hemipteran insect species. Aphids share X0 sex determination; 
however, models predict the opposite pattern, due to their unusual life cycles, 
which alternate between all-female asexual generations and a single sexual 
generation. Predictions include enrichment of female-biased genes on autosomes 
and of male-biased genes on the X, in contrast to expectations for obligately 
sexual species. Robust tests of these models require chromosome-level genome 
assemblies for aphids and related hemipterans with X0 sex determination and 
obligate sexual reproduction. In this study, we built the first chromosome-level 
assembly of a psyllid, an aphid relative with X0 sex determination and obligate 
sexuality, and compared it with recently resolved chromosome-level assemblies of 
aphid genomes. Aphid and psyllid X chromosomes differ strikingly. In aphids, 
female-biased genes are strongly enriched on autosomes and male-biased genes are 
enriched on the X. In psyllids, male-biased genes are enriched on autosomes. 
Furthermore, functionally important gene categories of aphids are enriched on 
autosomes. Aphid X-linked genes and male-biased genes are under relaxed 
purifying selection, but gene content and order on the X is highly conserved, 
possibly reflecting constraints imposed by unique chromosomal mechanisms 
associated with the unusual aphid life cycle.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa095
PMCID: PMC7403619
PMID: 32289166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1280. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1543. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa012.

Treasurer's Report for Financial Year (FY) 2018.

[No authors listed]

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa012
PMID: 32274503


1281. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2341-2356. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa090.

Extraordinary Sequence Diversity and Promiscuity of Centromeric Satellites in 
the Legume Tribe Fabeae.

Ávila Robledillo L(1)(2), Neumann P(1), Koblížková A(1), Novák P(1), Vrbová 
I(1), Macas J(1).

Author information:
(1)Biology Centre, Czech Academy of Sciences, České Budějovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice, Czech 
Republic.

Satellite repeats are major sequence constituents of centromeres in many plant 
and animal species. Within a species, a single family of satellite sequences 
typically occupies centromeres of all chromosomes and is absent from other parts 
of the genome. Due to their common origin, sequence similarities exist among the 
centromere-specific satellites in related species. Here, we report a remarkably 
different pattern of centromere evolution in the plant tribe Fabeae, which 
includes genera Pisum, Lathyrus, Vicia, and Lens. By immunoprecipitation of 
centromeric chromatin with CENH3 antibodies, we identified and characterized a 
large and diverse set of 64 families of centromeric satellites in 14 species. 
These families differed in their nucleotide sequence, monomer length 
(33-2,979 bp), and abundance in individual species. Most families were 
species-specific, and most species possessed multiple (2-12) satellites in their 
centromeres. Some of the repeats that were shared by several species exhibited 
promiscuous patterns of centromere association, being located within CENH3 
chromatin in some species, but apart from the centromeres in others. Moreover, 
FISH experiments revealed that the same family could assume centromeric and 
noncentromeric positions even within a single species. Taken together, these 
findings suggest that Fabeae centromeres are not shaped by the coevolution of a 
single centromeric satellite with its interacting CENH3 proteins, as proposed by 
the centromere drive model. This conclusion is also supported by the absence of 
pervasive adaptive evolution of CENH3 sequences retrieved from Fabeae species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa090
PMCID: PMC7403623
PMID: 32259249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1282. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1866-1881. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa091.

Viral Fitness Determines the Magnitude of Transcriptomic and Epigenomic 
Reprograming of Defense Responses in Plants.

Corrêa RL(1)(2)(3), Sanz-Carbonell A(1), Kogej Z(1)(4), Müller SY(3), Ambrós 
S(1), López-Gomollón S(3), Gómez G(1), Baulcombe DC(3), Elena SF(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biología Integrativa de Sistemas (I2SysBio), Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC)-Universitat de València, Paterna, Valencia, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Genetics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biotechnology and Systems Biology, National Institute of 
Biology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(5)The Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM.

Although epigenetic factors may influence the expression of defense genes in 
plants, their role in antiviral responses and the impact of viral adaptation and 
evolution in shaping these interactions are still poorly explored. We used two 
isolates of turnip mosaic potyvirus with varying degrees of adaptation to 
Arabidopsis thaliana to address these issues. One of the isolates was 
experimentally evolved in the plant and presented increased load and virulence 
relative to the ancestral isolate. The magnitude of the transcriptomic responses 
was larger for the evolved isolate and indicated a role of innate immunity 
systems triggered by molecular patterns and effectors in the infection process. 
Several transposable elements located in different chromatin contexts and 
epigenetic-related genes were also affected. Correspondingly, mutant plants 
having loss or gain of repressive marks were, respectively, more tolerant and 
susceptible to turnip mosaic potyvirus, with a more efficient response against 
the ancestral isolate. In wild-type plants, both isolates induced similar levels 
of cytosine methylation changes, including in and around transposable elements 
and stress-related genes. Results collectively suggested that apart from RNA 
silencing and basal immunity systems, DNA methylation and histone modification 
pathways may also be required for mounting proper antiviral defenses and that 
the effectiveness of this type of regulation strongly depends on the degree of 
viral adaptation to the host.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa091
PMID: 32259238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1283. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2309-2321. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa086.

Adaptive Shifts in Gene Regulation Underlie a Developmental Delay in 
Thermogenesis in High-Altitude Deer Mice.

Velotta JP(1), Robertson CE(2), Schweizer RM(1), McClelland GB(2), Cheviron 
ZA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT.
(2)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Aerobic performance is tied to fitness as it influences an animal's ability to 
find food, escape predators, or survive extreme conditions. At high altitude, 
where low O2 availability and persistent cold prevail, maximum metabolic heat 
production (thermogenesis) is an aerobic performance trait that is closely 
linked to survival. Understanding how thermogenesis evolves to enhance survival 
at high altitude will yield insight into the links between physiology, 
performance, and fitness. Recent work in deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus) has 
shown that adult mice native to high altitude have higher thermogenic capacities 
under hypoxia compared with lowland conspecifics, but that developing 
high-altitude pups delay the onset of thermogenesis. This finding suggests that 
natural selection on thermogenic capacity varies across life stages. To 
determine the mechanistic cause of this ontogenetic delay, we analyzed the 
transcriptomes of thermoeffector organs-brown adipose tissue and skeletal 
muscle-in developing deer mice native to low and high altitude. We demonstrate 
that the developmental delay in thermogenesis is associated with adaptive shifts 
in the expression of genes involved in nervous system development, fuel/O2 
supply, and oxidative metabolism pathways. Our results demonstrate that 
selection has modified the developmental trajectory of the thermoregulatory 
system at high altitude and has done so by acting on the regulatory systems that 
control the maturation of thermoeffector tissues. We suggest that the cold and 
hypoxic conditions of high altitude force a resource allocation tradeoff, 
whereby limited energy is allocated to developmental processes such as growth, 
versus active thermogenesis, during early development.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa086
PMCID: PMC7403621
PMID: 32243546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1284. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2440-2449. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa087.

OLGenie: Estimating Natural Selection to Predict Functional Overlapping Genes.

Nelson CW(1)(2), Ardern Z(3), Wei X(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural 
History, New York, NY.
(2)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Microbial Ecology, ZIEL-Institute for Food & Health, Technische Universität 
München, Freising, Germany.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(5)Department of Integrative Biology and Statistics, University of California, 
Berkeley, CA.

Purifying (negative) natural selection is a hallmark of functional biological 
sequences, and can be detected in protein-coding genes using the ratio of 
nonsynonymous to synonymous substitutions per site (dN/dS). However, when two 
genes overlap the same nucleotide sites in different frames, synonymous changes 
in one gene may be nonsynonymous in the other, perturbing dN/dS. Thus, scalable 
methods are needed to estimate functional constraint specifically for 
overlapping genes (OLGs). We propose OLGenie, which implements a modification of 
the Wei-Zhang method. Assessment with simulations and controls from viral 
genomes (58 OLGs and 176 non-OLGs) demonstrates low false-positive rates and 
good discriminatory ability in differentiating true OLGs from non-OLGs. We also 
apply OLGenie to the unresolved case of HIV-1's putative antisense protein gene, 
showing significant purifying selection. OLGenie can be used to study known OLGs 
and to predict new OLGs in genome annotation. Software and example data are 
freely available at https://github.com/chasewnelson/OLGenie (last accessed April 
10, 2020).

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa087
PMCID: PMC7531306
PMID: 32243542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1285. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2279-2286. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa083.

Rapid Accumulation of Mutations in Growing Mycelia of a Hypervariable Fungus 
Schizophyllum commune.

Bezmenova AV(1), Zvyagina EA(2), Fedotova AV(1)(3), Kasianov AS(4)(5), Neretina 
TV(3)(4)(6), Penin AA(3)(4), Bazykin GA(1)(4), Kondrashov AS(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Center of Life Sciences, Skoltech, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Surgut State University, Surgut, Russia.
(3)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Kharkevich Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Moscow, Russia.
(5)Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Moscow, Russia.
(6)N. A. Pertsov White Sea Biological Station, Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, Primorskiy, Russia.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.

The basidiomycete Schizophyllum commune has the highest level of genetic 
polymorphism known among living organisms. In a previous study, it was also 
found to have a moderately high per-generation mutation rate of 2×10-8, likely 
contributing to its high polymorphism. However, this rate has been measured only 
in an experiment on Petri dishes, and it is unclear how it translates to natural 
populations. Here, we used an experimental design that measures the rate of 
accumulation of de novo mutations in a linearly growing mycelium. We show that 
S. commune accumulates mutations at a rate of 1.24×10-7 substitutions per 
nucleotide per meter of growth, or ∼2.04×10-11 per nucleotide per cell division. 
In contrast to what has been observed in a number of species with extensive 
vegetative growth, this rate does not decline in the course of propagation of a 
mycelium. As a result, even a moderate per-cell-division mutation rate in 
S. commune can translate into a very high per-generation mutation rate when the 
number of cell divisions between consecutive meiosis is large.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa083
PMCID: PMC7403608
PMID: 32243532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1286. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2300-2308. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa085.

The Origin of Additive Genetic Variance Driven by Positive Selection.

Liu L(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang D(1), Chen Z(1), Chen X(2), Su Z(3), He X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

Fisher's fundamental theorem of natural selection predicts no additive variance 
of fitness in a natural population. Consistently, studies in a variety of wild 
populations show virtually no narrow-sense heritability (h2) for traits 
important to fitness. However, counterexamples are occasionally reported, 
calling for a deeper understanding on the evolution of additive variance. In 
this study, we propose adaptive divergence followed by population admixture as a 
source of the additive genetic variance of evolutionarily important traits. We 
experimentally tested the hypothesis by examining a panel of ∼1,000 yeast 
segregants produced by a hybrid of two yeast strains that experienced adaptive 
divergence. We measured >400 yeast cell morphological traits and found a strong 
positive correlation between h2 and evolutionary importance. Because adaptive 
divergence followed by population admixture could happen constantly, 
particularly in species with wide geographic distribution and strong migratory 
capacity (e.g., humans), the finding reconciles the observation of abundant 
additive variances in evolutionarily important traits with Fisher's fundamental 
theorem of natural selection. Importantly, the revealed role of positive 
selection in promoting rather than depleting additive variance suggests a simple 
explanation for why additive genetic variance can be dominant in a population 
despite the ubiquitous between-gene epistasis observed in functional assays.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa085
PMCID: PMC7403624
PMID: 32243529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1287. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2322-2331. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa088.

Gene Duplication in the Honeybee: Patterns of DNA Methylation, Gene Expression, 
and Genomic Environment.

Dyson CJ(1), Goodisman MAD(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA.

Gene duplication serves a critical role in evolutionary adaptation by providing 
genetic raw material to the genome. The evolution of duplicated genes may be 
influenced by epigenetic processes such as DNA methylation, which affects gene 
function in some taxa. However, the manner in which DNA methylation affects 
duplicated genes is not well understood. We studied duplicated genes in the 
honeybee Apis mellifera, an insect with a highly sophisticated social structure, 
to investigate whether DNA methylation was associated with gene duplication and 
genic evolution. We found that levels of gene body methylation were 
significantly lower in duplicate genes than in single-copy genes, implicating a 
possible role of DNA methylation in postduplication gene maintenance. 
Additionally, we discovered associations of gene body methylation with the 
location, length, and time since divergence of paralogous genes. We also found 
that divergence in DNA methylation was associated with divergence in gene 
expression in paralogs, although the relationship was not completely consistent 
with a direct link between DNA methylation and gene expression. Overall, our 
results provide further insight into genic methylation and how its association 
with duplicate genes might facilitate evolutionary processes and adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa088
PMID: 32243528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1288. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2287-2299. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa084.

Experimental Parasite Infection Causes Genome-Wide Changes in DNA Methylation.

Sagonas K(1), Meyer BS(2), Kaufmann J(3)(4), Lenz TL(5), Häsler R(6), Eizaguirre 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.
(2)Evolutionary Ecology of Marine Fishes, GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean 
Research, Kiel, Germany.
(3)School of Biological, Earth & Environmental Sciences, University College 
Cork, Cork, Republic of Ireland.
(4)Department for Evolutionary Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Biology, Plön, Germany.
(5)Research Group for Evolutionary Immunogenomics, Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(6)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany.

Parasites are arguably among the strongest drivers of natural selection, 
constraining hosts to evolve resistance and tolerance mechanisms. Although, the 
genetic basis of adaptation to parasite infection has been widely studied, 
little is known about how epigenetic changes contribute to parasite resistance 
and eventually, adaptation. Here, we investigated the role of host DNA 
methylation modifications to respond to parasite infections. In a controlled 
infection experiment, we used the three-spined stickleback fish, a model species 
for host-parasite studies, and their nematode parasite Camallanus lacustris. We 
showed that the levels of DNA methylation are higher in infected fish. Results 
furthermore suggest correlations between DNA methylation and shifts in key 
fitness and immune traits between infected and control fish, including 
respiratory burst and functional trans-generational traits such as the 
concentration of motile sperm. We revealed that genes associated with metabolic, 
developmental, and regulatory processes (cell death and apoptosis) were 
differentially methylated between infected and control fish. Interestingly, 
genes such as the neuropeptide FF receptor 2 and the integrin alpha 1 as well as 
molecular pathways including the Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation were 
hypermethylated in infected fish, suggesting parasite-mediated repression 
mechanisms of immune responses. Altogether, we demonstrate that parasite 
infection contributes to genome-wide DNA methylation modifications. Our study 
brings novel insights into the evolution of vertebrate immunity and suggests 
that epigenetic mechanisms are complementary to genetic responses against 
parasite-mediated selection.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa084
PMCID: PMC7531312
PMID: 32227215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1289. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2808-2824. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa082.

The Drosophila Y Chromosome Affects Heterochromatin Integrity Genome-Wide.

Brown EJ(1), Nguyen AH(1), Bachtrog D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.

The Drosophila Y chromosome is gene poor and mainly consists of silenced, 
repetitive DNA. Nonetheless, the Y influences expression of hundreds of genes 
genome-wide, possibly by sequestering key components of the heterochromatin 
machinery away from other positions in the genome. To test the influence of the 
Y chromosome on the genome-wide chromatin landscape, we assayed the genomic 
distribution of histone modifications associated with gene activation (H3K4me3) 
or heterochromatin (H3K9me2 and H3K9me3) in fruit flies with varying sex 
chromosome complements (X0, XY, and XYY males; XX and XXY females). Consistent 
with the general deficiency of active chromatin modifications on the Y, we find 
that Y gene dose has little influence on the genomic distribution of H3K4me3. In 
contrast, both the presence and the number of Y chromosomes strongly influence 
genome-wide enrichment patterns of repressive chromatin modifications. Highly 
repetitive regions such as the pericentromeres, the dot, and the Y chromosome 
(if present) are enriched for heterochromatic modifications in wildtype males 
and females, and even more strongly in X0 flies. In contrast, the additional Y 
chromosome in XYY males and XXY females diminishes the heterochromatic signal in 
these normally silenced, repeat-rich regions, which is accompanied by an 
increase in expression of Y-linked repeats. We find hundreds of genes that are 
expressed differentially between individuals with aberrant sex chromosome 
karyotypes, many of which also show sex-biased expression in wildtype 
Drosophila. Thus, Y chromosomes influence heterochromatin integrity genome-wide, 
and differences in the chromatin landscape of males and females may also 
contribute to sex-biased gene expression and sexual dimorphisms.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa082
PMCID: PMC7530609
PMID: 32211857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1290. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1855-1865. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa079.

A Fine-Scale Genetic Map for Vervet Monkeys.

Pfeifer SP(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Evolution and Medicine, School of Life Sciences, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ.

Despite its important biological role, the evolution of recombination rates 
remains relatively poorly characterized. This owes, in part, to the lack of 
high-quality genomic resources to address this question across diverse species. 
Humans and our closest evolutionary relatives, anthropoid apes, have remained a 
major focus of large-scale sequencing efforts, and thus recombination rate 
variation has been comparatively well studied in this group-with earlier work 
revealing a conservation at the broad- but not the fine-scale. However, in order 
to better understand the nature of this variation, and the time scales on which 
substantial modifications occur, it is necessary to take a broader phylogenetic 
perspective. I here present the first fine-scale genetic map for vervet monkeys 
based on whole-genome population genetic data from ten individuals and perform a 
series of comparative analyses with the great apes. The results reveal a number 
of striking features. First, owing to strong positive correlations with 
diversity and weak negative correlations with divergence, analyses suggest a 
dominant role for purifying and background selection in shaping patterns of 
variation in this species. Second, results support a generally reduced 
broad-scale recombination rate compared with the great apes, as well as a 
narrower fraction of the genome in which the majority of recombination events 
are observed to occur. Taken together, this data set highlights the great 
necessity of future research to identify genomic features and quantify 
evolutionary processes that are driving these rate changes across primates.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa079
PMCID: PMC7825483
PMID: 32211856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1291. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2268-2278. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa081.

Two Cobalt Chelatase Subunits Can Be Generated from a Single chlD Gene via 
Programed Frameshifting.

Antonov IV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioengineering, Federal Research Centre Fundamentals of 
Biotechnology, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Department of Biological and Medical Physics, Moscow Institute of Physics and 
Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region, Russia.

Magnesium chelatase chlIDH and cobalt chelatase cobNST enzymes are required for 
biosynthesis of (bacterio)chlorophyll and cobalamin (vitamin B12), respectively. 
Each enzyme consists of large, medium, and small subunits. Structural and 
primary sequence similarities indicate common evolutionary origin of the 
corresponding subunits. It has been reported earlier that some of vitamin B12 
synthesizing organisms utilized unusual cobalt chelatase enzyme consisting of a 
large cobalt chelatase subunit (cobN) along with a medium (chlD) and a small 
(chlI) subunits of magnesium chelatase. In attempt to understand the nature of 
this phenomenon, we analyzed >1,200 diverse genomes of cobalamin and/or 
chlorophyll producing prokaryotes. We found that, surprisingly, genomes of many 
cobalamin producers contained cobN and chlD genes only; a small subunit gene was 
absent. Further on, we have discovered a diverse group of chlD genes with 
functional programed ribosomal frameshifting signals. Given a high similarity 
between the small subunit and the N-terminal part of the medium subunit, we 
proposed that programed translational frameshifting may allow chlD mRNA to 
produce both subunits. Indeed, in genomes where genes for small subunits were 
absent, we observed statistically significant enrichment of programed 
frameshifting signals in chlD genes. Interestingly, the details of the 
frameshifting mechanisms producing small and medium subunits from a single chlD 
gene could be prokaryotic taxa specific. All over, this programed frameshifting 
phenomenon was observed to be highly conserved and present in both bacteria and 
archaea.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa081
PMID: 32211852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1292. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1241-1242. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa021.

Evolution on the Vine: A History of Tomato Domestication in Latin America.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa021
PMID: 32201886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1293. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1240-1242. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa023.

Genomic Study Reveals Rich Pre-Hispanic History and Genetic Changes among 
Diverse Indigenous Mexican Populations.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa023
PMID: 32201885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1294. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2257-2267. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa080.

Elaboration of the Corticosteroid Synthesis Pathway in Primates through a 
Multistep Enzyme.

Olson-Manning CF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Augustana University, Sioux Falls, SD.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Metabolic networks are complex cellular systems dependent on the interactions 
among, and regulation of, the enzymes in the network. Although there is great 
diversity of types of enzymes that make up metabolic networks, the models meant 
to understand the possible evolutionary outcomes following duplication neglect 
specifics about the enzyme, pathway context, and cellular constraints. To 
illuminate the mechanisms that shape the evolution of biochemical pathways, I 
functionally characterize the consequences of gene duplication of an enzyme 
family that performs multiple subsequent enzymatic reactions (a multistep 
enzyme) in the corticosteroid pathway in primates. The products of the 
corticosteroid pathway (aldosterone and cortisol) are steroid hormones that 
regulate metabolism and stress response in tetrapods. These steroid hormones are 
synthesized by a multistep enzyme Cytochrome P450 11B (CYP11B) that performs 
subsequent steps on different carbon atoms of the steroid derivatives. Through 
ancestral state reconstruction and in vitro characterization, I find that the 
primate ancestor of the CYP11B1 and CYP11B2 paralogs had moderate ability to 
synthesize both cortisol and aldosterone. Following duplication in Old World 
primates, the CYP11B1 homolog specialized on the production of cortisol, whereas 
its paralog, CYP11B2, maintained its ability to perform multiple subsequent 
steps as in the ancestral pathway. Unlike CYP11B1, CYP11B2 could not specialize 
on the production of aldosterone because it is constrained to perform earlier 
steps in the corticosteroid synthesis pathway to achieve the final product 
aldosterone. These results suggest that enzyme function, pathway context, along 
with tissue-specific regulation, both play a role in shaping potential outcomes 
of metabolic network elaboration.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa080
PMCID: PMC7403617
PMID: 32196091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1295. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2084-2098. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa071.

Rampant Misexpression in a Mimulus (Monkeyflower) Introgression Line Caused by 
Hybrid Sterility, Not Regulatory Divergence.

Kerwin RE(1)(2), Sweigart AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI.

Divergence in gene expression regulation is common between closely related 
species and may give rise to incompatibilities in their hybrid progeny. In this 
study, we investigated the relationship between regulatory evolution within 
species and reproductive isolation between species. We focused on a well-studied 
case of hybrid sterility between two closely related yellow monkeyflower 
species, Mimulus guttatus and Mimulus nasutus, that is caused by two epistatic 
loci, hybrid male sterility 1 (hms1) and hybrid male sterility 2 (hms2). We 
compared genome-wide transcript abundance across male and female reproductive 
tissues (i.e., stamens and carpels) from four genotypes: M. guttatus, M. 
nasutus, and sterile and fertile progeny from an advanced M. nasutus-M. guttatus 
introgression line carrying the hms1-hms2 incompatibility. We observed 
substantial variation in transcript abundance between M. guttatus and 
M. nasutus, including distinct but overlapping patterns of tissue-biased 
expression, providing evidence for regulatory divergence between these species. 
We also found rampant genome-wide misexpression, but only in the affected 
tissues (i.e., stamens) of sterile introgression hybrids carrying incompatible 
alleles at hms1 and hms2. Examining patterns of allele-specific expression in 
sterile and fertile introgression hybrids, we found evidence for interspecific 
divergence in cis- and trans-regulation, including compensatory cis-trans 
mutations likely to be driven by stabilizing selection. Nevertheless, species 
divergence in gene regulatory networks cannot explain the vast majority of the 
gene misexpression we observe in Mimulus introgression hybrids, which instead 
likely manifests as a downstream consequence of sterility itself.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa071
PMCID: PMC7306685
PMID: 32196085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1296. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2228-2240. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa077.

Unmatched Level of Molecular Convergence among Deeply Divergent Complex 
Multicellular Fungi.

Merényi Z(1), Prasanna AN(1), Wang Z(2), Kovács K(1)(3), Hegedüs B(1), Bálint 
B(1), Papp B(1)(3), Townsend JP(2)(4)(5), Nagy LG(1).

Author information:
(1)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological 
Research Center, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
(3)Hungarian Centre of Excellence for Molecular Medicine, Metabolic Systems 
Biology Lab, Szeged, Hungary.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT.
(5)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT.

Convergent evolution is pervasive in nature, but it is poorly understood how 
various constraints and natural selection limit the diversity of evolvable 
phenotypes. Here, we analyze the transcriptome across fruiting body development 
to understand the independent evolution of complex multicellularity in the two 
largest clades of fungi-the Agarico- and Pezizomycotina. Despite >650 My of 
divergence between these clades, we find that very similar sets of genes have 
convergently been co-opted for complex multicellularity, followed by expansions 
of their gene families by duplications. Over 82% of shared 
multicellularity-related gene families were expanding in both clades, indicating 
a high prevalence of convergence also at the gene family level. This convergence 
is coupled with a rich inferred repertoire of multicellularity-related genes in 
the most recent common ancestor of the Agarico- and Pezizomycotina, consistent 
with the hypothesis that the coding capacity of ancestral fungal genomes might 
have promoted the repeated evolution of complex multicellularity. We interpret 
this repertoire as an indication of evolutionary predisposition of fungal 
ancestors for evolving complex multicellular fruiting bodies. Our work suggests 
that evolutionary convergence may happen not only when organisms are closely 
related or are under similar selection pressures, but also when ancestral 
genomic repertoires render certain evolutionary trajectories more likely than 
others, even across large phylogenetic distances.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa077
PMCID: PMC7403615
PMID: 32191325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1297. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2002-2014. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa062.

Tbx2a Modulates Switching of RH2 and LWS Opsin Gene Expression.

Sandkam BA(1), Campello L(2), O'Brien C(1), Nandamuri SP(1), Gammerdinger WJ(1), 
Conte MA(1), Swaroop A(2), Carleton KL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Maryland, College Park, MD.
(2)Neurobiology, Neurodegeneration & Repair Laboratory, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Sensory systems are tuned by selection to maximize organismal fitness in 
particular environments. This tuning has implications for intraspecies 
communication, the maintenance of species boundaries, and speciation. Tuning of 
color vision largely depends on the sequence of the expressed opsin proteins. To 
improve tuning of visual sensitivities to shifts in habitat or foraging ecology 
over the course of development, many organisms change which opsins are 
expressed. Changes in this developmental sequence (heterochronic shifts) can 
create differences in visual sensitivity among closely related species. The 
genetic mechanisms by which these developmental shifts occur are poorly 
understood. Here, we use quantitative trait locus analyses, genome sequencing, 
and gene expression studies in African cichlid fishes to identify a role for the 
transcription factor Tbx2a in driving a switch between long wavelength sensitive 
(LWS) and Rhodopsin-like (RH2) opsin expression. We identify binding sites for 
Tbx2a in the LWS promoter and the highly conserved locus control region of RH2 
which concurrently promote LWS expression while repressing RH2 expression. We 
also present evidence that a single change in Tbx2a regulatory sequence has led 
to a species difference in visual tuning, providing the first mechanistic model 
for the evolution of rapid switches in sensory tuning. This difference in visual 
tuning likely has important roles in evolution as it corresponds to differences 
in diet, microhabitat choice, and male nuptial coloration.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa062
PMCID: PMC7849988
PMID: 32191319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1298. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2110-2123. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa075.

Relative Model Fit Does Not Predict Topological Accuracy in Single-Gene Protein 
Phylogenetics.

Spielman SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Rowan University, Glassboro, NJ.

It is regarded as best practice in phylogenetic reconstruction to perform 
relative model selection to determine an appropriate evolutionary model for the 
data. This procedure ranks a set of candidate models according to their goodness 
of fit to the data, commonly using an information theoretic criterion. Users 
then specify the best-ranking model for inference. Although it is often assumed 
that better-fitting models translate to increase accuracy, recent studies have 
shown that the specific model employed may not substantially affect inferences. 
We examine whether there is a systematic relationship between relative model fit 
and topological inference accuracy in protein phylogenetics, using simulations 
and real sequences. Simulations employed site-heterogeneous mechanistic codon 
models that are distinct from protein-level phylogenetic inference models, 
allowing us to investigate how protein models performs when they are 
misspecified to the data, as will be the case for any real sequence analysis. We 
broadly find that phylogenies inferred across models with vastly different fits 
to the data produce highly consistent topologies. We additionally find that all 
models infer similar proportions of false-positive splits, raising the 
possibility that all available models of protein evolution are similarly 
misspecified. Moreover, we find that the parameter-rich GTR (general time 
reversible) model, whose amino acid exchangeabilities are free parameters, 
performs similarly to models with fixed exchangeabilities, although the 
inference precision associated with GTR models was not examined. We conclude 
that, although relative model selection may not hinder phylogenetic analysis on 
protein data, it may not offer specific predictable improvements and is not a 
reliable proxy for accuracy.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa075
PMCID: PMC7306691
PMID: 32191313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1299. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2241-2256. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa078.

Dynamic Evolution of Euchromatic Satellites on the X Chromosome in Drosophila 
melanogaster and the simulans Clade.

Sproul JS(1), Khost DE(1), Eickbush DG(1), Negm S(1), Wei X(2), Wong I(1), 
Larracuente AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY.
(2)Department of Biomedical Genetics, University of Rochester Medical Center, 
Rochester, NY.

Satellite DNAs (satDNAs) are among the most dynamically evolving components of 
eukaryotic genomes and play important roles in genome regulation, genome 
evolution, and speciation. Despite their abundance and functional impact, we 
know little about the evolutionary dynamics and molecular mechanisms that shape 
satDNA distributions in genomes. Here, we use high-quality genome assemblies to 
study the evolutionary dynamics of two complex satDNAs, Rsp-like and 
1.688 g/cm3, in Drosophila melanogaster and its three nearest relatives in the 
simulans clade. We show that large blocks of these repeats are highly dynamic in 
the heterochromatin, where their genomic location varies across species. We 
discovered that small blocks of satDNA that are abundant in X chromosome 
euchromatin are similarly dynamic, with repeats changing in abundance, location, 
and composition among species. We detail the proliferation of a rare satellite 
(Rsp-like) across the X chromosome in D. simulans and D. mauritiana. Rsp-like 
spread by inserting into existing clusters of the older, more abundant 1.688 
satellite, in events likely facilitated by microhomology-mediated repair 
pathways. We show that Rsp-like is abundant on extrachromosomal circular DNA in 
D. simulans, which may have contributed to its dynamic evolution. Intralocus 
satDNA expansions via unequal exchange and the movement of higher order repeats 
also contribute to the fluidity of the repeat landscape. We find evidence that 
euchromatic satDNA repeats experience cycles of proliferation and 
diversification somewhat analogous to bursts of transposable element 
proliferation. Our study lays a foundation for mechanistic studies of satDNA 
proliferation and the functional and evolutionary consequences of satDNA 
movement.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa078
PMCID: PMC7403614
PMID: 32191304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1300. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2211-2227. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa076.

Genomic Signature of Shifts in Selection in a Subalpine Ant and Its 
Physiological Adaptations.

Cicconardi F(1), Krapf P(2), D'Annessa I(3), Gamisch A(2)(4), Wagner HC(2), 
Nguyen AD(5), Economo EP(6), Mikheyev AS(7), Guénard B(8), Grabherr R(9), 
Andesner P(2), Wolfgang A(2), Di Marino D(10), Steiner FM(2), Schlick-Steiner 
BC(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Ecology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(3)Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche "Giulio Natta", CNR (SCITEC-CNR), 
Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Biosciences, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
(5)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
FL.
(6)Biodiversity & Biocomplexity Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science & Technology, 
Onna, Japan.
(7)Ecology and Evolution Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science & Technology, Onna, 
Japan.
(8)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(9)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Natural Resources and Life 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(10)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences - New York-Marche Structural 
Biology Center (NY-MaSBiC), Polytechnic University of Marche, Ancona, Italy.

Understanding how organisms adapt to extreme environments is fundamental and can 
provide insightful case studies for both evolutionary biology and climate-change 
biology. Here, we take advantage of the vast diversity of lifestyles in ants to 
identify genomic signatures of adaptation to extreme habitats such as high 
altitude. We hypothesized two parallel patterns would occur in a genome adapting 
to an extreme habitat: 1) strong positive selection on genes related to 
adaptation and 2) a relaxation of previous purifying selection. We tested this 
hypothesis by sequencing the high-elevation specialist Tetramorium alpestre and 
four other phylogenetically related species. In support of our hypothesis, we 
recorded a strong shift of selective forces in T. alpestre, in particular a 
stronger magnitude of diversifying and relaxed selection when compared with all 
other ants. We further disentangled candidate molecular adaptations in both gene 
expression and protein-coding sequence that were identified by our genome-wide 
analyses. In particular, we demonstrate that T. alpestre has 1) a higher level 
of expression for stv and other heat-shock proteins in chill-shock tests and 2) 
enzymatic enhancement of Hex-T1, a rate-limiting regulatory enzyme that controls 
the entry of glucose into the glycolytic pathway. Together, our analyses 
highlight the adaptive molecular changes that support colonization of 
high-altitude environments.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa076
PMCID: PMC7403626
PMID: 32181804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1301. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2137-2152. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa073.

Phylogenetic Modeling of Regulatory Element Turnover Based on Epigenomic Data.

Dukler N(1)(2), Huang YF(3), Siepel A(1).

Author information:
(1)Simons Center for Quantitative Biology, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold 
Spring Harbor, NY.
(2)Physiology, Biophysics, and Systems Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 
New York, NY.
(3)Department of Biology and Huck Institute of Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA.

Evolutionary changes in gene expression are often driven by gains and losses of 
cis-regulatory elements (CREs). The dynamics of CRE evolution can be examined 
using multispecies epigenomic data, but so far such analyses have generally been 
descriptive and model-free. Here, we introduce a probabilistic modeling 
framework for the evolution of CREs that operates directly on raw chromatin 
immunoprecipitation and sequencing (ChIP-seq) data and fully considers the 
phylogenetic relationships among species. Our framework includes a phylogenetic 
hidden Markov model, called epiPhyloHMM, for identifying the locations of 
multiply aligned CREs, and a combined phylogenetic and generalized linear model, 
called phyloGLM, for accounting for the influence of a rich set of genomic 
features in describing their evolutionary dynamics. We apply these methods to 
previously published ChIP-seq data for the H3K4me3 and H3K27ac histone 
modifications in liver tissue from nine mammals. We find that enhancers are 
gained and lost during mammalian evolution at about twice the rate of promoters, 
and that turnover rates are negatively correlated with DNA sequence 
conservation, expression level, and tissue breadth, and positively correlated 
with distance from the transcription start site, consistent with previous 
findings. In addition, we find that the predicted dosage sensitivity of target 
genes positively correlates with DNA sequence constraint in CREs but not with 
turnover rates, perhaps owing to differences in the effect sizes of the relevant 
mutations. Altogether, our probabilistic modeling framework enables a variety of 
powerful new analyses.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa073
PMCID: PMC7306682
PMID: 32176292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1302. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2197-2210. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa072.

Runaway GC Evolution in Gerbil Genomes.

Pracana R(1), Hargreaves AD(1), Mulley JF(2), Holland PWH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, Gwynedd, United 
Kingdom.

Recombination increases the local GC-content in genomic regions through 
GC-biased gene conversion (gBGC). The recent discovery of a large genomic region 
with extreme GC-content in the fat sand rat Psammomys obesus provides a model to 
study the effects of gBGC on chromosome evolution. Here, we compare the 
GC-content and GC-to-AT substitution patterns across protein-coding genes of 
four gerbil species and two murine rodents (mouse and rat). We find that the 
known high-GC region is present in all the gerbils, and is characterized by high 
substitution rates for all mutational categories (AT-to-GC, GC-to-AT, and 
GC-conservative) both at synonymous and nonsynonymous sites. A higher AT-to-GC 
than GC-to-AT rate is consistent with the high GC-content. Additionally, we find 
more than 300 genes outside the known region with outlying values of AT-to-GC 
synonymous substitution rates in gerbils. Of these, over 30% are organized into 
at least 17 large clusters observable at the megabase-scale. The unusual 
GC-skewed substitution pattern suggests the evolution of genomic regions with 
very high recombination rates in the gerbil lineage, which can lead to a runaway 
increase in GC-content. Our results imply that rapid evolution of GC-content is 
possible in mammals, with gerbil species providing a powerful model to study the 
mechanisms of gBGC.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa072
PMCID: PMC7403616
PMID: 32170949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1303. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2069-2083. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa070.

Positive Selection and Inactivation in the Vision and Hearing Genes of 
Cetaceans.

McGowen MR(1)(2), Tsagkogeorga G(1), Williamson J(1), Morin PA(3), Rossiter 
ASJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary, University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Vertebrate Zoology, Smithsonian National Museum of Natural 
History, Washington, DC.
(3)Southwest Fisheries Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, 
La Jolla, CA.

The transition to an aquatic lifestyle in cetaceans (whales and dolphins) 
resulted in a radical transformation in their sensory systems. Toothed whales 
acquired specialized high-frequency hearing tied to the evolution of 
echolocation, whereas baleen whales evolved low-frequency hearing. More 
generally, all cetaceans show adaptations for hearing and seeing underwater. To 
determine the extent to which these phenotypic changes have been driven by 
molecular adaptation, we performed large-scale targeted sequence capture of 179 
sensory genes across the Cetacea, incorporating up to 54 cetacean species from 
all major clades as well as their closest relatives, the hippopotamuses. We 
screened for positive selection in 167 loci related to vision and hearing and 
found that the diversification of cetaceans has been accompanied by pervasive 
molecular adaptations in both sets of genes, including several loci implicated 
in nonsyndromic hearing loss. Despite these findings, however, we found no 
direct evidence of positive selection at the base of odontocetes coinciding with 
the origin of echolocation, as found in studies examining fewer taxa. By using 
contingency tables incorporating taxon- and gene-based controls, we show that, 
although numbers of positively selected hearing and nonsyndromic hearing loss 
genes are disproportionately high in cetaceans, counts of vision genes do not 
differ significantly from expected values. Alongside these adaptive changes, we 
find increased evidence of pseudogenization of genes involved in cone-mediated 
vision in mysticetes and deep-diving odontocetes.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular 
Biology and Evolution 2020. This work is written by US Government employees and 
is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa070
PMID: 32170943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1304. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2052-2068. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa068.

Multiple Genetic Trajectories to Extreme Abiotic Stress Adaptation in Arctic 
Brassicaceae.

Birkeland S(1), Gustafsson ALS(1), Brysting AK(2), Brochmann C(1), Nowak MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, Department of Biosciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Extreme environments offer powerful opportunities to study how different 
organisms have adapted to similar selection pressures at the molecular level. 
Arctic plants have adapted to some of the coldest and driest biomes on Earth and 
typically possess suites of similar morphological and physiological adaptations 
to extremes in light and temperature. Here, we compare patterns of molecular 
evolution in three Brassicaceae species that have independently colonized the 
Arctic and present some of the first genetic evidence for plant adaptations to 
the Arctic environment. By testing for positive selection and identifying 
convergent substitutions in orthologous gene alignments for a total of 15 
Brassicaceae species, we find that positive selection has been acting on 
different genes, but similar functional pathways in the three Arctic lineages. 
The positively selected gene sets identified in the three Arctic species showed 
convergent functional profiles associated with extreme abiotic stress 
characteristic of the Arctic. However, there was little evidence for 
independently fixed mutations at the same sites and for positive selection 
acting on the same genes. The three species appear to have evolved similar 
suites of adaptations by modifying different components in similar stress 
response pathways, implying that there could be many genetic trajectories for 
adaptation to the Arctic environment. By identifying candidate genes and 
functional pathways potentially involved in Arctic adaptation, our results 
provide a framework for future studies aimed at testing for the existence of a 
functional syndrome of Arctic adaptation in the Brassicaceae and perhaps 
flowering plants in general.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa068
PMCID: PMC7306683
PMID: 32167553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1305. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2450-2460. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa069.

GenomegaMap: Within-Species Genome-Wide dN/dS Estimation from over 10,000 
Genomes.

Wilson DJ(1); CRyPTIC Consortium.

Collaborators: Crook DW, Peto TEA, Walker AS, Hoosdally SJ, Gibertoni Cruz AL, 
Carter J, Grazian C, Earle SG, Kouchaki S, Lachapelle A, Yang Y, Clifton DA, 
Fowler PW, Iqbal Z, Hunt M, Knaggs J, Smith EG, Rathod P, Jarrett L, Matias D, 
Cirillo DM, Borroni E, Battaglia S, Ghodousi A, Spitaleri A, Cabibbe A, Tahseen 
S, Nilgiriwala K, Shah S, Rodrigues C, Kambli P, Surve U, Khot R, Niemann S, 
Kohl TA, Merker M, Hoffmann H, Todt K, Plesnik S, Ismail N, Omar SV, Joseph L, 
Thwaites G, Thuong TNT, Ngoc NH, Srinivasan V, Walker TM, Moore D, Coronel J, 
Solano W, Gao GF, He G, Zhao Y, Liu C, Ma A, Zhu B, Laurenson I, Claxton P, Koch 
A, Wilkinson R, Lalvani A, Posey J, Gardy J, Werngren J, Paton N, Jou R, Wu MH, 
Lin WH, Ferrazoli L, de Oliveira RS, Arandjelovic I, Chaiprasert A, Comas I, 
Roig CJ, Drobniewski FA, Farhat MR, Gao Q, Hee ROT, Sintchenko V, Supply P, van 
Soolingen D.

Author information:
(1)Big Data Institute, Nuffield Department of Population Health, Li Ka Shing 
Centre for Health Information and Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.

The dN/dS ratio provides evidence of adaptation or functional constraint in 
protein-coding genes by quantifying the relative excess or deficit of amino 
acid-replacing versus silent nucleotide variation. Inexpensive sequencing 
promises a better understanding of parameters, such as dN/dS, but analyzing very 
large data sets poses a major statistical challenge. Here, I introduce 
genomegaMap for estimating within-species genome-wide variation in dN/dS, and I 
apply it to 3,979 genes across 10,209 tuberculosis genomes to characterize the 
selection pressures shaping this global pathogen. GenomegaMap is a 
phylogeny-free method that addresses two major problems with existing 
approaches: 1) It is fast no matter how large the sample size and 2) it is 
robust to recombination, which causes phylogenetic methods to report artefactual 
signals of adaptation. GenomegaMap uses population genetics theory to 
approximate the distribution of allele frequencies under general, 
parent-dependent mutation models. Coalescent simulations show that substitution 
parameters are well estimated even when genomegaMap's simplifying assumption of 
independence among sites is violated. I demonstrate the ability of genomegaMap 
to detect genuine signatures of selection at antimicrobial resistance-conferring 
substitutions in Mycobacterium tuberculosis and describe a novel signature of 
selection in the cold-shock DEAD-box protein A gene deaD/csdA. The genomegaMap 
approach helps accelerate the exploitation of big data for gaining new insights 
into evolution within species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa069
PMCID: PMC7403622
PMID: 32167543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1306. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2192-2196. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa067.

Vulnerability to Fishing and Life History Traits Correlate with the Load of 
Deleterious Mutations in Teleosts.

Rolland J(1)(2)(3), Schluter D(1)(2), Romiguier J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(4)CNRS, UMR 5554 Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution, Université de 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Understanding why some species accumulate more deleterious substitutions than 
others is an important question relevant in evolutionary biology and 
conservation sciences. Previous studies conducted in terrestrial taxa suggest 
that life history traits correlate with the efficiency of purifying selection 
and accumulation of deleterious mutations. Using a large genome data set of 76 
species of teleostean fishes, we show that species with life history traits 
associated with vulnerability to fishing have an increased rate of deleterious 
mutation accumulation (measured via dN/dS, i.e., nonsynonymous over synonymous 
substitution rate). Our results, focusing on a large clade of aquatic species, 
generalize previous patterns found so far in few clades of terrestrial 
vertebrates. These results also show that vulnerable species to fishing 
inherently accumulate more deleterious substitutions than nonthreatened ones, 
which illustrates the potential links among population genetics, ecology, and 
fishing policies to prevent species extinction.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa067
PMCID: PMC7403610
PMID: 32163146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1307. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2045-2051. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa066.

Low Spontaneous Mutation Rate and Pleistocene Radiation of Pea Aphids.

Fazalova V(1), Nevado B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Accurate estimates of divergence times are essential to understand the 
evolutionary history of species. It allows linking evolutionary histories of the 
diverging lineages with past geological, climatic, and other changes in 
environment and shed light on the processes involved in speciation. The pea 
aphid radiation includes multiple host races adapted to different legume host 
plants. It is thought that diversification in this system occurred very 
recently, over the past 8,000-16,000 years. This young age estimate was used to 
link diversification in pea aphids to the onset of human agriculture, and led to 
the establishment of the pea aphid radiation as a model system in the study of 
speciation with gene flow. Here, we re-examine the age of the pea aphid 
radiation, by combining a mutation accumulation experiment with a genome-wide 
estimate of divergence between distantly related pea aphid host races. We 
estimate the spontaneous mutation rate for pea aphids as 2.7×10-10 per haploid 
genome per parthenogenic generation. Using this estimate of mutation rate and 
the genome-wide genetic differentiation observed between pea aphid host races, 
we show that the pea aphid radiation is much more ancient than assumed 
previously, predating Neolithic agriculture by several hundreds of thousands of 
years. Our results rule out human agriculture as the driver of diversification 
of the pea aphid radiation, and call for re-assessment of the role of allopatric 
isolation during Pleistocene climatic oscillations in divergence of the pea 
aphid complex.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa066
PMID: 32163142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1308. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2034-2044. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa065.

Phylogenetics Identifies Two Eumetazoan TRPM Clades and an Eighth TRP Family, 
TRP Soromelastatin (TRPS).

Himmel NJ(1), Gray TR(1), Cox DN(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Institute, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jan 4;38(1):329.

Transient receptor potential melastatins (TRPMs) are most well known as cold and 
menthol sensors, but are in fact broadly critical for life, from ion homeostasis 
to reproduction. Yet, the evolutionary relationship between TRPM channels 
remains largely unresolved, particularly with respect to the placement of 
several highly divergent members. To characterize the evolution of TRPM and like 
channels, we performed a large-scale phylogenetic analysis of >1,300 TRPM-like 
sequences from 14 phyla (Annelida, Arthropoda, Brachiopoda, Chordata, Cnidaria, 
Echinodermata, Hemichordata, Mollusca, Nematoda, Nemertea, Phoronida, 
Priapulida, Tardigrada, and Xenacoelomorpha), including sequences from a variety 
of recently sequenced genomes that fill what would otherwise be substantial 
taxonomic gaps. These findings suggest: 1) the previously recognized TRPM family 
is in fact two distinct families, including canonical TRPM channels and an 
eighth major previously undescribed family of animal TRP channel, TRP 
soromelastatin; 2) two TRPM clades predate the last bilaterian-cnidarian 
ancestor; and 3) the vertebrate-centric trend of categorizing TRPM channels as 
1-8 is inappropriate for most phyla, including other chordates.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa065
PMCID: PMC7306681
PMID: 32159767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1309. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2173-2191. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa061.

A Uniquely Complex Mitochondrial Proteome from Euglena gracilis.

Hammond MJ(1), Nenarokova A(1)(2), Butenko A(1)(3), Zoltner M(4)(5), Dobáková 
EL(1), Field MC(1)(4), Lukeš J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biology Centre, Institute of Parasitology, Czech Academy of Sciences, České 
Budějovice, Budweis, Czech Republic.
(2)Faculty of Sciences, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice, Budweis, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(4)School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(5)Faculty of Science, Charles University, Biocev, Vestec, Czech Republic.

Euglena gracilis is a metabolically flexible, photosynthetic, and adaptable 
free-living protist of considerable environmental importance and 
biotechnological value. By label-free liquid chromatography tandem mass 
spectrometry, a total of 1,786 proteins were identified from the E. gracilis 
purified mitochondria, representing one of the largest mitochondrial proteomes 
so far described. Despite this apparent complexity, protein machinery 
responsible for the extensive RNA editing, splicing, and processing in the 
sister clades diplonemids and kinetoplastids is absent. This strongly suggests 
that the complex mechanisms of mitochondrial gene expression in diplonemids and 
kinetoplastids occurred late in euglenozoan evolution, arising independently. By 
contrast, the alternative oxidase pathway and numerous ribosomal subunits 
presumed to be specific for parasitic trypanosomes are present in E. gracilis. 
We investigated the evolution of unexplored protein families, including import 
complexes, cristae formation proteins, and translation termination factors, as 
well as canonical and unique metabolic pathways. We additionally compare this 
mitoproteome with the transcriptome of Eutreptiella gymnastica, illuminating 
conserved features of Euglenida mitochondria as well as those exclusive to 
E. gracilis. This is the first mitochondrial proteome of a free-living protist 
from the Excavata and one of few available for protists as a whole. This study 
alters our views of the evolution of the mitochondrion and indicates early 
emergence of complexity within euglenozoan mitochondria, independent of 
parasitism.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa061
PMCID: PMC7403612
PMID: 32159766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1310. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1843. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa013.

The Genome of the Endangered Dryas Monkey Provides New Insights into the 
Evolutionary History of the Vervets.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):183-194.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa013
PMCID: PMC7253194
PMID: 32159217


1311. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2015-2028. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa063.

Mammalian Alternative Translation Initiation Is Mostly Nonadaptive.

Xu C(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.

Alternative translation initiation (ATLI) refers to the existence of multiple 
translation initiation sites per gene and is a widespread phenomenon in 
eukaryotes. ATLI is commonly assumed to be advantageous through creating 
proteome diversity or regulating protein synthesis. We here propose an 
alternative hypothesis that ATLI arises primarily from nonadaptive initiation 
errors presumably due to the limited ability of ribosomes to distinguish 
sequence motifs truly signaling translation initiation from similar sequences. 
Our hypothesis, but not the adaptive hypothesis, predicts a series of global 
patterns of ATLI, all of which are confirmed at the genomic scale by 
quantitative translation initiation sequencing in multiple human and mouse cell 
lines and tissues. Similarly, although many codons differing from AUG by one 
nucleotide can serve as start codons, our analysis suggests that using non-AUG 
start codons is mostly disadvantageous. These and other findings strongly 
suggest that ATLI predominantly results from molecular error, requiring a major 
revision of our understanding of the precision and regulation of translation 
initiation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa063
PMCID: PMC7828576
PMID: 32145028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1312. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1847-1854. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa058.

Convergent Losses of TLR5 Suggest Altered Extracellular Flagellin Detection in 
Four Mammalian Lineages.

Sharma V(1)(2)(3)(4), Hecker N(1)(2)(3), Walther F(5), Stuckas H(5), Hiller 
M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, 
Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, Dresden, Germany.
(3)Center for Systems Biology Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(4)CRTD-DFG Center for Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Carl Gustav Carus Faculty 
of Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden; Paul Langerhans Institute 
Dresden (PLID) of the Helmholtz Center Munich at University Hospital Carl Gustav 
Carus and Faculty of Medicine, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden; German 
Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Munich, Neuherberg, Germany.
(5)Senckenberg Natural History Collections Dresden, Senckenberg - Leibniz 
Institution for Biodiversity and Earth System Research, Dresden, Germany.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role for the innate immune system 
by detecting pathogen-associated molecular patterns. TLR5 encodes the major 
extracellular receptor for bacterial flagellin and frequently evolves under 
positive selection, consistent with coevolutionary arms races between the host 
and pathogens. Furthermore, TLR5 is inactivated in several vertebrates and a 
TLR5 stop codon polymorphism is widespread in human populations. Here, we 
analyzed the genomes of 120 mammals and discovered that TLR5 is convergently 
lost in four independent lineages, comprising guinea pigs, Yangtze river 
dolphin, pinnipeds, and pangolins. Validated inactivating mutations, absence of 
protein-coding transcript expression, and relaxed selection on the TLR5 remnants 
confirm these losses. PCR analysis further confirmed the loss of TLR5 in the 
pinniped stem lineage. Finally, we show that TLR11, encoding a second 
extracellular flagellin receptor, is also absent in these four lineages. 
Independent losses of TLR5 and TLR11 suggest that a major pathway for detecting 
flagellated bacteria is not essential for different mammals and predicts an 
impaired capacity to sense extracellular flagellin.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa058
PMID: 32145026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1313. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1986-2001. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa060.

Evolution of an Amniote-Specific Mechanism for Modulating Ubiquitin Signaling 
via Phosphoregulation of the E2 Enzyme UBE2D3.

Roman-Trufero M(1), Ito CM(1), Pedebos C(2), Magdalou I(3), Wang YF(4), Karimi 
MM(4), Moyon B(5), Webster Z(5), di Gregorio A(6), Azuara V(7), Khalid S(2), 
Speck C(3), Rodriguez T(6), Dillon N(1).

Author information:
(1)Gene Regulation and Chromatin Group, MRC London Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, United 
Kingdom.
(3)DNA Replication Group, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Imperial College 
London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Bioinformatics and Computing, MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Transgenics and ES Cell Facility, MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(6)BHF Centre for Research Excellence, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Imperial College London, 
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, United Kingdom.

Genetic variation in the enzymes that catalyze posttranslational modification of 
proteins is a potentially important source of phenotypic variation during 
evolution. Ubiquitination is one such modification that affects turnover of 
virtually all of the proteins in the cell in addition to roles in signaling and 
epigenetic regulation. UBE2D3 is a promiscuous E2 enzyme, which acts as an 
ubiquitin donor for E3 ligases that catalyze ubiquitination of developmentally 
important proteins. We have used protein sequence comparison of UBE2D3 orthologs 
to identify a position in the C-terminal α-helical region of UBE2D3 that is 
occupied by a conserved serine in amniotes and by alanine in anamniote 
vertebrate and invertebrate lineages. Acquisition of the serine (S138) in the 
common ancestor to modern amniotes created a phosphorylation site for Aurora B. 
Phosphorylation of S138 disrupts the structure of UBE2D3 and reduces the level 
of the protein in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Substitution of S138 with 
the anamniote alanine (S138A) increases the level of UBE2D3 in ESCs as well as 
being a gain of function early embryonic lethal mutation in mice. When mutant 
S138A ESCs were differentiated into extraembryonic primitive endoderm, levels of 
the PDGFRα and FGFR1 receptor tyrosine kinases were reduced and primitive 
endoderm differentiation was compromised. Proximity ligation analysis showed 
increased interaction between UBE2D3 and the E3 ligase CBL and between CBL and 
the receptor tyrosine kinases. Our results identify a sequence change that 
altered the ubiquitination landscape at the base of the amniote lineage with 
potential effects on amniote biology and evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa060
PMCID: PMC7306689
PMID: 32145025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1314. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2029-2033. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa064.

Limited Evidence for Selection at the FADS Locus in Native American Populations.

Mathieson I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

The FADS locus contains the genes FADS1 and FADS2 that encode enzymes involved 
in the synthesis of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids. This locus appears 
to have been a repeated target of selection in human evolution, likely because 
dietary input of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids varied over time 
depending on environment and subsistence strategy. Several recent studies have 
identified selection at the FADS locus in Native American populations, 
interpreted as evidence for adaptation during or subsequent to the passage 
through Beringia. Here, we show that these signals are confounded by independent 
selection-postdating the split from Native Americans-in the European and, 
possibly, the East Asian populations used in the population branch statistic 
test. This is supported by direct evidence from ancient DNA that one of the 
putatively selected haplotypes was already common in Northern Eurasia at the 
time of the separation of Native American ancestors. An explanation for the 
present-day distribution of the haplotype that is more consistent with the data 
is that Native Americans retain the ancestral state of Paleolithic Eurasians. 
Another haplotype at the locus may reflect a secondary selection signal, 
although its functional impact is unknown.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa064
PMCID: PMC7306688
PMID: 32145021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1315. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1979-1985. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa059.

Large X-Linked Palindromes Undergo Arm-to-Arm Gene Conversion across Mus 
Lineages.

Swanepoel CM(1), Gerlinger ER(1), Mueller JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI.

Large (>10 kb), nearly identical (>99% nucleotide identity), palindromic 
sequences are enriched on mammalian sex chromosomes. Primate Y-palindromes 
undergo high rates of arm-to-arm gene conversion, a proposed mechanism for 
maintaining their sequence integrity in the absence of X-Y recombination. It is 
unclear whether X-palindromes, which can freely recombine in females, undergo 
arm-to-arm gene conversion and, if so, at what rate. We generated high-quality 
sequence assemblies of Mus molossinus and M. spretus X-palindromic regions and 
compared them with orthologous M. musculus X-palindromes. Our evolutionary 
sequence comparisons find evidence of X-palindrome arm-to-arm gene conversion at 
rates comparable to autosomal allelic gene conversion rates in mice. Mus 
X-palindromes also carry more derived than ancestral variants between species, 
suggesting that their sequence is rapidly diverging. We speculate that in 
addition to maintaining genes' sequence integrity via sequence homogenization, 
palindrome arm-to-arm gene conversion may also facilitate rapid sequence 
divergence.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa059
PMCID: PMC7306697
PMID: 32145018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1316. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1964-1978. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa057.

Genome Architecture Facilitates Phenotypic Plasticity in the Honeybee (Apis 
mellifera).

Duncan EJ(1)(2), Leask MP(1), Dearden PK(1).

Author information:
(1)Genomics Aotearoa and Biochemistry Department, University of Otago, Dunedin, 
New Zealand.
(2)School of Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, United Kingdom.

Phenotypic plasticity, the ability of an organism to alter its phenotype in 
response to an environmental cue, facilitates rapid adaptation to changing 
environments. Plastic changes in morphology and behavior are underpinned by 
widespread gene expression changes. However, it is unknown if, or how, genomes 
are structured to ensure these robust responses. Here, we use repression of 
honeybee worker ovaries as a model of plasticity. We show that the honeybee 
genome is structured with respect to plasticity; genes that respond to an 
environmental trigger are colocated in the honeybee genome in a series of gene 
clusters, many of which have been assembled in the last 80 My during the 
evolution of the Apidae. These clusters are marked by histone modifications that 
prefigure the gene expression changes that occur as the ovary activates, 
suggesting that these genomic regions are poised to respond plastically. That 
the linear sequence of the honeybee genome is organized to coordinate widespread 
gene expression changes in response to environmental influences and that the 
chromatin organization in these regions is prefigured to respond to these 
influences is perhaps unexpected and has implications for other examples of 
plasticity in physiology, evolution, and human disease.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa057
PMCID: PMC7306700
PMID: 32134461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1317. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1942-1948. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa055.

Bacterial Group II Intron Genomic Neighborhoods Reflect Survival Strategies: 
Hiding and Hijacking.

Waldern J(1), Schiraldi NJ(2), Belfort M(1)(3), Novikova O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and RNA Institute, University at Albany, 
Albany, NY.
(2)Academic and Research Computing Center, Information Technology Services, 
University at Albany, Albany, NY.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Public Health, University at 
Albany, Albany, NY.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):3081.

Group II (gII) introns are mobile retroelements that can spread to new DNA sites 
through retrotransposition, which can be influenced by a variety of host 
factors. To determine if these host factors bear any relationship to the genomic 
location of gII introns, we developed a bioinformatic pipeline wherein we 
focused on the genomic neighborhoods of bacterial gII introns within their 
native contexts and sought to determine global relationships between introns and 
their surrounding genes. We found that, although gII introns inhabit diverse 
regions, these neighborhoods are often functionally enriched for genes that 
could promote gII intron retention or proliferation. On one hand, we observe 
that gII introns are frequently found hiding in mobile elements or after 
transcription terminators. On the other hand, gII introns are enriched in 
locations in which they could hijack host functions for their movement, 
potentially timing expression of the intron with genes that produce favorable 
conditions for retrotransposition. Thus, we propose that gII intron 
distributions have been shaped by relationships with their surrounding genomic 
neighbors.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa055
PMCID: PMC7306698
PMID: 32134458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1318. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1647-1656. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa033.

Origins, Admixture Dynamics, and Homogenization of the African Gene Pool in the 
Americas.

Gouveia MH(1)(2)(3), Borda V(1), Leal TP(1)(4), Moreira RG(1)(5), Bergen AW(6), 
Kehdy FSG(1)(7), Alvim I(1), Aquino MM(1), Araujo GS(1)(8), Araujo NM(1), Furlan 
V(1)(9), Liboredo R(1), Machado M(1)(10), Magalhaes WCS(1)(11), Michelin LA(1), 
Rodrigues MR(1)(12), Rodrigues-Soares F(1)(13), Sant Anna HP(1)(14), Santolalla 
ML(1), Scliar MO(1)(15), Soares-Souza G(1), Zamudio R(1), Zolini C(1)(16)(17), 
Bortolini MC(18), Dean M(19), Gilman RH(20)(21), Guio H(22), Rocha J(23)(24), 
Pereira AC(25), Barreto ML(26)(27), Horta BL(28), Lima-Costa MF(2), Mbulaiteye 
SM(6), Chanock SJ(6), Tishkoff SA(29), Yeager M(19), Tarazona-Santos 
E(1)(17)(21)(30).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Genética, Ecologia e Evolução, Instituto de Ciências 
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Pesquisa Rene Rachou, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Belo Horizonte, MG, 
Brazil.
(3)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome 
Research Institute, Bethesda, MD.
(4)Departamento de Estatística, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(5)Laboratório de Genômica, Centro de Laboratórios Multiusuário (CELAM), ICB, 
UFMG, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(6)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute 
(NCI), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD.
(7)Laboratório de Hanseníase, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio 
de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(8)Laboratório de Genética Humana e Médica, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, 
Universidade Federal do Pará - Campus Guamá, Belém, PA, Brazil.
(9)Instituto de Ciências Exatas e Tecnológicas, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, 
Campus UFV-Florestal, Florestal, MG, Brazil.
(10)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, MD.
(11)Núcleo de Ensino e Pesquisas do Instituto Mário Penna - NEP-IMP, Bairro 
Luxemburgo, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(12)Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, Biosciences Institute, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(13)Departamento de Patologia, Genética e Evolução, Instituto de Ciências 
Biológicas e Naturais, Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro, Uberaba, MG, 
Brazil.
(14)Melbourne Integrative Genomics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, 
Australia.
(15)Human Genome and Stem Cell Research Center, Biosciences Institute, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(16)Beagle, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(17)Mosaico Translational Genomics Initiative, Universidade Federal de Minas 
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(18)Departamento de Genética, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(19)Cancer Genomics Research Laboratory, Frederick National Laboratory for 
Cancer Research, Frederick, MD.
(20)Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD.
(21)Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru.
(22)Instituto Nacional de Salud, Lima, Peru.
(23)Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(24)CIBIO/InBIO: Research Center in Biodiversity and Genetic Resources, Vairão, 
Portugal.
(25)Instituto do Coração, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(26)Instituto de Saúde Coletiva, Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, BA, 
Brazil.
(27)Center of Data and Knowledge Integration for Health (CIDACS), Fundação 
Oswaldo Cruz (FIOCRUZ), Salvador, Brazil.
(28)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Epidemiologia, Universidade Federal de Pelotas, 
Pelotas, RS, Brazil.
(29)Department of Genetics and Department of Biology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(30)Instituto de Estudos Avançados Transdisciplinares, Universidade Federal de 
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

The Transatlantic Slave Trade transported more than 9 million Africans to the 
Americas between the early 16th and the mid-19th centuries. We performed a 
genome-wide analysis using 6,267 individuals from 25 populations to infer how 
different African groups contributed to North-, South-American, and Caribbean 
populations, in the context of geographic and geopolitical factors, and compared 
genetic data with demographic history records of the Transatlantic Slave Trade. 
We observed that West-Central Africa and Western Africa-associated ancestry 
clusters are more prevalent in northern latitudes of the Americas, whereas the 
South/East Africa-associated ancestry cluster is more prevalent in southern 
latitudes of the Americas. This pattern results from geographic and geopolitical 
factors leading to population differentiation. However, there is a substantial 
decrease in the between-population differentiation of the African gene pool 
within the Americas, when compared with the regions of origin from Africa, 
underscoring the importance of historical factors favoring admixture between 
individuals with different African origins in the New World. This 
between-population homogenization in the Americas is consistent with the excess 
of West-Central Africa ancestry (the most prevalent in the Americas) in the 
United States and Southeast-Brazil, with respect to historical-demography 
expectations. We also inferred that in most of the Americas, intercontinental 
admixture intensification occurred between 1750 and 1850, which correlates 
strongly with the peak of arrivals from Africa. This study contributes with a 
population genetics perspective to the ongoing social, cultural, and political 
debate regarding ancestry, admixture, and the mestizaje process in the Americas.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa033
PMCID: PMC7253211
PMID: 32128591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1319. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1925-1941. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa054.

Origin and Evolution of Polycyclic Triterpene Synthesis.

Santana-Molina C(1), Rivas-Marin E(1), Rojas AM(1), Devos DP(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD)-CSIC, Junta de Andalucía, 
Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Seville, Spain.

Polycyclic triterpenes are members of the terpene family produced by the 
cyclization of squalene. The most representative polycyclic triterpenes are 
hopanoids and sterols, the former are mostly found in bacteria, whereas the 
latter are largely limited to eukaryotes, albeit with a growing number of 
bacterial exceptions. Given their important role and omnipresence in most 
eukaryotes, contrasting with their scant representation in bacteria, sterol 
biosynthesis was long thought to be a eukaryotic innovation. Thus, their 
presence in some bacteria was deemed to be the result of lateral gene transfer 
from eukaryotes. Elucidating the origin and evolution of the polycyclic 
triterpene synthetic pathways is important to understand the role of these 
compounds in eukaryogenesis and their geobiological value as biomarkers in 
fossil records. Here, we have revisited the phylogenies of the main enzymes 
involved in triterpene synthesis, performing gene neighborhood analysis and 
phylogenetic profiling. Squalene can be biosynthesized by two different pathways 
containing the HpnCDE or Sqs proteins. Our results suggest that the HpnCDE 
enzymes are derived from carotenoid biosynthesis ones and that they assembled in 
an ancestral squalene pathway in bacteria, while remaining metabolically 
versatile. Conversely, the Sqs enzyme is prone to be involved in lateral gene 
transfer, and its emergence is possibly related to the specialization of 
squalene biosynthesis. The biosynthesis of hopanoids seems to be ancestral in 
the Bacteria domain. Moreover, no triterpene cyclases are found in Archaea, 
invoking a potential scenario in which eukaryotic genes for sterol biosynthesis 
assembled from ancestral bacterial contributions in early eukaryotic lineages.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa054
PMCID: PMC7306690
PMID: 32125435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1320. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1949-1963. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa056.

Ancient Coretention of Paralogs of Cid Centromeric Histones and Cal1 Chaperones 
in Mosquito Species.

Kursel LE(1)(2)(3), Welsh FC(1)(2)(4), Malik HS(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Graduate Program, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA.
(2)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(4)University of Puget Sound, Tacoma, WA.
(5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA.

Despite their essential role in chromosome segregation in most eukaryotes, 
centromeric histones (CenH3s) evolve rapidly and are subject to gene turnover. 
We previously identified four instances of gene duplication and specialization 
of Cid, which encodes for the CenH3 in Drosophila. We hypothesized that 
retention of specialized Cid paralogs could be selectively advantageous to 
resolve the intralocus conflict that occurs on essential genes like Cid, which 
are subject to divergent selective pressures to perform multiple functions. We 
proposed that intralocus conflict could be a widespread phenomenon that drives 
evolutionary innovation in centromeric proteins. If this were the case, we might 
expect to find other instances of coretention and specialization of centromeric 
proteins during animal evolution. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that 
most mosquito species encode two CenH3 (mosqCid) genes, mosqCid1 and mosqCid2, 
which have been coretained for over 150 My. In addition, Aedes species encode a 
third mosqCid3 gene, which arose from an independent gene duplication of 
mosqCid1. Like Drosophila Cid paralogs, mosqCid paralogs evolve under different 
selective constraints and show tissue-specific expression patterns. Analysis of 
mosqCid N-terminal protein motifs further supports the model that mosqCid 
paralogs have functionally diverged. Extending our survey to other centromeric 
proteins, we find that all Anopheles mosquitoes encode two CAL1 paralogs, which 
are the chaperones that deposit CenH3 proteins at centromeres in Diptera, but a 
single CENP-C paralog. The ancient coretention of paralogs of centromeric 
proteins adds further support to the hypothesis that intralocus conflict can 
drive their coretention and functional specialization.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa056
PMCID: PMC7306699
PMID: 32125433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1321. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1907-1924. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa052.

Sparse Epistatic Patterns in the Evolution of Terpene Synthases.

Ballal A(1), Laurendon C(2)(3), Salmon M(2)(3)(4), Vardakou M(2)(3)(5), Cheema 
J(6), Defernez M(7), O'Maille PE(2)(3)(8), Morozov AV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics & Astronomy and Center for Quantitative Biology, 
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ.
(2)John Innes Centre, Department of Metabolic Biology, Norwich Research Park, 
Norwich, United Kingdom.
(3)Food & Health Programme, Institute of Food Research, Norwich Research Park, 
Norwich, United Kingdom.
(4)Earlham Institute, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(6)John Innes Centre, Department of Computational and Systems Biology, Norwich 
Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(7)Core Science Resources, Quadram Institute, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, 
United Kingdom.
(8)SRI International, Menlo Park, CA.

We explore sequence determinants of enzyme activity and specificity in a major 
enzyme family of terpene synthases. Most enzymes in this family catalyze 
reactions that produce cyclic terpenes-complex hydrocarbons widely used by 
plants and insects in diverse biological processes such as defense, 
communication, and symbiosis. To analyze the molecular mechanisms of emergence 
of terpene cyclization, we have carried out in-depth examination of mutational 
space around (E)-β-farnesene synthase, an Artemisia annua enzyme which catalyzes 
production of a linear hydrocarbon chain. Each mutant enzyme in our synthetic 
libraries was characterized biochemically, and the resulting reaction rate data 
were used as input to the Michaelis-Menten model of enzyme kinetics, in which 
free energies were represented as sums of one-amino-acid contributions and 
two-amino-acid couplings. Our model predicts measured reaction rates with high 
accuracy and yields free energy landscapes characterized by relatively few 
coupling terms. As a result, the Michaelis-Menten free energy landscapes have 
simple, interpretable structure and exhibit little epistasis. We have also 
developed biophysical fitness models based on the assumption that highly fit 
enzymes have evolved to maximize the output of correct products, such as cyclic 
products or a specific product of interest, while minimizing the output of 
byproducts. This approach results in nonlinear fitness landscapes that are 
considerably more epistatic. Overall, our experimental and computational 
framework provides focused characterization of evolutionary emergence of novel 
enzymatic functions in the context of microevolutionary exploration of sequence 
space around naturally occurring enzymes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa052
PMID: 32119077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1322. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1819-1831. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa049.

Relative Efficiencies of Simple and Complex Substitution Models in Estimating 
Divergence Times in Phylogenomics.

Tao Q(1)(2), Barba-Montoya J(1)(2), Huuki LA(1), Durnan MK(1)(2), Kumar 
S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Center for Excellence in Genome Medicine and Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

The conventional wisdom in molecular evolution is to apply parameter-rich models 
of nucleotide and amino acid substitutions for estimating divergence times. 
However, the actual extent of the difference between time estimates produced by 
highly complex models compared with those from simple models is yet to be 
quantified for contemporary data sets that frequently contain sequences from 
many species and genes. In a reanalysis of many large multispecies alignments 
from diverse groups of taxa, we found that the use of the simplest models can 
produce divergence time estimates and credibility intervals similar to those 
obtained from the complex models applied in the original studies. This result is 
surprising because the use of simple models underestimates sequence divergence 
for all the data sets analyzed. We found three fundamental reasons for the 
observed robustness of time estimates to model complexity in many practical data 
sets. First, the estimates of branch lengths and node-to-tip distances under the 
simplest model show an approximately linear relationship with those produced by 
using the most complex models applied on data sets with many sequences. Second, 
relaxed clock methods automatically adjust rates on branches that experience 
considerable underestimation of sequence divergences, resulting in time 
estimates that are similar to those from complex models. And, third, the 
inclusion of even a few good calibrations in an analysis can reduce the 
difference in time estimates from simple and complex models. The robustness of 
time estimates to model complexity in these empirical data analyses is 
encouraging, because all phylogenomics studies use statistical models that are 
oversimplified descriptions of actual evolutionary substitution processes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa049
PMCID: PMC7253201
PMID: 32119075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1323. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1893-1906. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa050.

Genetic Diversity and Thermal Performance in Invasive and Native Populations of 
African Fig Flies.

Comeault AA(1), Wang J(2), Tittes S(3), Isbell K(4), Ingley S(5), Hurlbert 
AH(4), Matute DR(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, Gwynedd, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC.
(3)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
CA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC.
(5)Faculty of Sciences, Brigham Young University, Hawaii, Laie, HI.

During biological invasions, invasive populations can suffer losses of genetic 
diversity that are predicted to negatively impact their fitness/performance. 
Despite examples of invasive populations harboring lower diversity than 
conspecific populations in their native range, few studies have linked this 
lower diversity to a decrease in fitness. Using genome sequences, we show that 
invasive populations of the African fig fly, Zaprionus indianus, have less 
genetic diversity than conspecific populations in their native range and that 
diversity is proportionally lower in regions of the genome experiencing low 
recombination rates. This result suggests that selection may have played a role 
in lowering diversity in the invasive populations. We next use interspecific 
comparisons to show that genetic diversity remains relatively high in invasive 
populations of Z. indianus when compared with other closely related species. By 
comparing genetic diversity in orthologous gene regions, we also show that the 
genome-wide landscape of genetic diversity differs between invasive and native 
populations of Z. indianus indicating that invasion not only affects amounts of 
genetic diversity but also how that diversity is distributed across the genome. 
Finally, we use parameter estimates from thermal performance curves for 13 
species of Zaprionus to show that Z. indianus has the broadest thermal niche of 
measured species, and that performance does not differ between invasive and 
native populations. These results illustrate how aspects of genetic diversity in 
invasive species can be decoupled from measures of fitness, and that a broad 
thermal niche may have helped facilitate Z. indianus's range expansion.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa050
PMCID: PMC7306694
PMID: 32109281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1324. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1546. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa018.

Back from the Deep: Scientists Use "Resurrection Ecology" of 600-Year-Old Water 
Fleas to Better Understand How Organisms Adapt to Lake Pollution.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):475-487.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa018
PMID: 32106305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1325. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1832-1842. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa047.

Online Bayesian Phylodynamic Inference in BEAST with Application to Epidemic 
Reconstruction.

Gill MS(1), Lemey P(1), Suchard MA(2)(3)(4), Rambaut A(5)(6), Baele G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Biomathematics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA.
(5)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(6)Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Reconstructing pathogen dynamics from genetic data as they become available 
during an outbreak or epidemic represents an important statistical scenario in 
which observations arrive sequentially in time and one is interested in 
performing inference in an "online" fashion. Widely used Bayesian phylogenetic 
inference packages are not set up for this purpose, generally requiring one to 
recompute trees and evolutionary model parameters de novo when new data arrive. 
To accommodate increasing data flow in a Bayesian phylogenetic framework, we 
introduce a methodology to efficiently update the posterior distribution with 
newly available genetic data. Our procedure is implemented in the BEAST 1.10 
software package, and relies on a distance-based measure to insert new taxa into 
the current estimate of the phylogeny and imputes plausible values for new model 
parameters to accommodate growing dimensionality. This augmentation creates 
informed starting values and re-uses optimally tuned transition kernels for 
posterior exploration of growing data sets, reducing the time necessary to 
converge to target posterior distributions. We apply our framework to data from 
the recent West African Ebola virus epidemic and demonstrate a considerable 
reduction in time required to obtain posterior estimates at different time 
points of the outbreak. Beyond epidemic monitoring, this framework easily finds 
other applications within the phylogenetics community, where changes in the 
data-in terms of alignment changes, sequence addition or removal-present common 
scenarios that can benefit from online inference.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa047
PMCID: PMC7253210
PMID: 32101295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1326. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1775-1789. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa048.

Complex Evolution of Insect Insulin Receptors and Homologous Decoy Receptors, 
and Functional Significance of Their Multiplicity.

Smýkal V(1), Pivarči M(1), Provazník J(1), Bazalová O(1), Jedlička P(2), Lukšan 
O(2), Horák A(3), Vaněčková H(1), Beneš V(4), Fiala I(3), Hanus R(2), Doležel 
D(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Entomology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, 
Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
(2)Chemistry of Social Insects, Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry 
of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Czech Academy of Sciences, 
Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
(4)Genomics Core Facility, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, University of South 
Bohemia, Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.

Evidence accumulates that the functional plasticity of insulin and insulin-like 
growth factor signaling in insects could spring, among others, from the 
multiplicity of insulin receptors (InRs). Their multiple variants may be 
implemented in the control of insect polyphenism, such as wing or caste 
polyphenism. Here, we present a comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of insect 
InR sequences in 118 species from 23 orders and investigate the role of three 
InRs identified in the linden bug, Pyrrhocoris apterus, in wing polymorphism 
control. We identified two gene clusters (Clusters I and II) resulting from an 
ancestral duplication in a late ancestor of winged insects, which remained 
conserved in most lineages, only in some of them being subject to further 
duplications or losses. One remarkable yet neglected feature of InR evolution is 
the loss of the tyrosine kinase catalytic domain, giving rise to decoys of InR 
in both clusters. Within the Cluster I, we confirmed the presence of the 
secreted decoy of insulin receptor in all studied Muscomorpha. More importantly, 
we described a new tyrosine kinase-less gene (DR2) in the Cluster II, conserved 
in apical Holometabola for ∼300 My. We differentially silenced the three 
P. apterus InRs and confirmed their participation in wing polymorphism control. 
We observed a pattern of Cluster I and Cluster II InRs impact on wing 
development, which differed from that postulated in planthoppers, suggesting an 
independent establishment of insulin/insulin-like growth factor signaling 
control over wing development, leading to idiosyncrasies in the co-option of 
multiple InRs in polyphenism control in different taxa.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa048
PMCID: PMC7253209
PMID: 32101294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1327. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1544. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa022.

Herpes Simplex Viruses: New Relationships between Epidemiology and History.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1259-1271.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa022
PMID: 32101293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1328. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1761-1774. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa046.

Readthrough Errors Purge Deleterious Cryptic Sequences, Facilitating the Birth 
of Coding Sequences.

Kosinski LJ(1), Masel J(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
(2)Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.

De novo protein-coding innovations sometimes emerge from ancestrally noncoding 
DNA, despite the expectation that translating random sequences is overwhelmingly 
likely to be deleterious. The "preadapting selection" hypothesis claims that 
emergence is facilitated by prior, low-level translation of noncoding sequences 
via molecular errors. It predicts that selection on polypeptides translated only 
in error is strong enough to matter and is strongest when erroneous expression 
is high. To test this hypothesis, we examined noncoding sequences located 
downstream of stop codons (i.e., those potentially translated by readthrough 
errors) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae genes. We identified a class of "fragile" 
proteins under strong selection to reduce readthrough, which are unlikely 
substrates for co-option. Among the remainder, sequences showing evidence of 
readthrough translation, as assessed by ribosome profiling, encoded C-terminal 
extensions with higher intrinsic structural disorder, supporting the preadapting 
selection hypothesis. The cryptic sequences beyond the stop codon, rather than 
spillover effects from the regular C-termini, are primarily responsible for the 
higher disorder. Results are robust to controlling for the fact that stronger 
selection also reduces the length of C-terminal extensions. These findings 
indicate that selection acts on 3' UTRs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae to purge 
potentially deleterious variants of cryptic polypeptides, acting more strongly 
in genes that experience more readthrough errors.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa046
PMCID: PMC7253197
PMID: 32101291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1329. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1708-1726. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa040.

Evidence of Pathogen-Induced Immunogenetic Selection across the Large Geographic 
Range of a Wild Seabird.

Levy H(1), Fiddaman SR(1), Vianna JA(2), Noll D(2)(3), Clucas GV(4)(5), Sidhu 
JKH(1), Polito MJ(6), Bost CA(7), Phillips RA(8), Crofts S(9), Miller GD(10), 
Pistorius P(11), Bonnadonna F(12), Le Bohec C(13)(14), Barbosa A(15), Trathan 
P(8), Raya Rey A(16)(17)(18), Frantz LAF(19), Hart T(1), Smith AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Departamento de Ecosistemas y Medio Ambiente, Pontificia Universidad Católica 
de Chile, Macul, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Ciencias Ecológicas, Instituto de Ecología y Biodiversidad, 
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Cornell Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY.
(5)Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
(6)Department of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Louisiana State University, 
Baton Rouge, LA.
(7)Centre d'Etudes Biologiques de Chizé (CEBC), UMR 7372 du CNRS-Université de 
La Rochelle, Villiers-en-Bois, France.
(8)British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(9)Falklands Conservation, Stanley, Falkland Islands, United Kingdom.
(10)Microbiology and Immunology, PALM, University of Western Australia, Crawley, 
Western Australia, Australia.
(11)DST/NRF Centre of Excellence at the Percy FitzPatrick Institute for African 
Ornithology, Department of Zoology, Nelson Mandela University, Port Elizabeth, 
South Africa.
(12)CEFE UMR 5175, CNRS, Université de Montpellier, Université Paul-Valéry 
Montpellier, EPHE, Montpellier, France.
(13)Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC UMR 7178, Strasbourg, France.
(14)Département de Biologie Polaire, Centre Scientifique de Monaco, Monaco, 
Principality of Monaco.
(15)Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, Departamento de Ecología Evolutiva, 
CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(16)Centro Austral de Investigaciones Científicas - Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CADIC-CONICET), Ushuaia, Tierra del 
Fuego, Argentina.
(17)Instituto de Ciencias Polares, Ambiente y Recursos Naturales, Universidad 
Nacional de Tierra del Fuego, Ushuaia, Tierra del Fuego, Argentina.
(18)Wildlife Conservation Society, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(19)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.

Over evolutionary time, pathogen challenge shapes the immune phenotype of the 
host to better respond to an incipient threat. The extent and direction of this 
selection pressure depend on the local pathogen composition, which is in turn 
determined by biotic and abiotic features of the environment. However, little is 
known about adaptation to local pathogen threats in wild animals. The Gentoo 
penguin (Pygoscelis papua) is a species complex that lends itself to the study 
of immune adaptation because of its circumpolar distribution over a large 
latitudinal range, with little or no admixture between different clades. In this 
study, we examine the diversity in a key family of innate immune genes-the 
Toll-like receptors (TLRs)-across the range of the Gentoo penguin. The three 
TLRs that we investigated present varying levels of diversity, with TLR4 and 
TLR5 greatly exceeding the diversity of TLR7. We present evidence of positive 
selection in TLR4 and TLR5, which points to pathogen-driven adaptation to the 
local pathogen milieu. Finally, we demonstrate that two positively selected 
cosegregating sites in TLR5 are sufficient to alter the responsiveness of the 
receptor to its bacterial ligand, flagellin. Taken together, these results 
suggest that Gentoo penguins have experienced distinct pathogen-driven selection 
pressures in different environments, which may be important given the role of 
the Gentoo penguin as a sentinel species in some of the world's most rapidly 
changing environments.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa040
PMCID: PMC7253215
PMID: 32096861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1330. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):940-941. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa017.

How Algae Adapt to the Extreme Antarctic Cold.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):849-863.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa017
PMID: 32091609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1331. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):940-941. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa020.

Shark and Ray Vision Come into Focus.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):811-827.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa020
PMID: 32091608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1332. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Oct 1;37(10):2791-2807. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa030.

A Behavior-Manipulating Virus Relative as a Source of Adaptive Genes for 
Drosophila Parasitoids.

Di Giovanni D(1), Lepetit D(1), Guinet B(1), Bennetot B(1)(2), Boulesteix M(1), 
Couté Y(3), Bouchez O(4), Ravallec M(5), Varaldi J(1).

Author information:
(1)Université de Lyon Université Lyon 1, CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et 
Biologie Evolutive UMR 5558, Villeurbanne, France.
(2)Ecologie Systématique & Evolution (UMR 8079), Université Paris Sud, Orsay, 
France.
(3)Université de Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Inserm, IRIG-BGE, Grenoble, France.
(4)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), US 1426, GeT-PlaGe, 
Genotoul, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(5)UMR 1333 INRAE - Université Montpellier "Diversité, Génomes et Interactions 
Microorganismes-Insectes" (DGIMI), Montpellier, France.

Some species of parasitic wasps have domesticated viral machineries to deliver 
immunosuppressive factors to their hosts. Up to now, all described cases fall 
into the Ichneumonoidea superfamily, which only represents around 10% of 
hymenoptera diversity, raising the question of whether such domestication 
occurred outside this clade. Furthermore, the biology of the ancestral donor 
viruses is completely unknown. Since the 1980s, we know that Drosophila 
parasitoids belonging to the Leptopilina genus, which diverged from the 
Ichneumonoidea superfamily 225 Ma, do produce immunosuppressive virus-like 
structure in their reproductive apparatus. However, the viral origin of these 
structures has been the subject of debate. In this article, we provide genomic 
and experimental evidence that those structures do derive from an ancestral 
virus endogenization event. Interestingly, its close relatives induce a behavior 
manipulation in present-day wasps. Thus, we conclude that virus domestication is 
more prevalent than previously thought and that behavior manipulation may have 
been instrumental in the birth of such associations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa030
PMID: 32080746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1333. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1790-1808. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa038.

Predicting the Landscape of Recombination Using Deep Learning.

Adrion JR(1), Galloway JG(1), Kern AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR.

Accurately inferring the genome-wide landscape of recombination rates in natural 
populations is a central aim in genomics, as patterns of linkage influence 
everything from genetic mapping to understanding evolutionary history. Here, we 
describe recombination landscape estimation using recurrent neural networks 
(ReLERNN), a deep learning method for estimating a genome-wide recombination map 
that is accurate even with small numbers of pooled or individually sequenced 
genomes. Rather than use summaries of linkage disequilibrium as its input, 
ReLERNN takes columns from a genotype alignment, which are then modeled as a 
sequence across the genome using a recurrent neural network. We demonstrate that 
ReLERNN improves accuracy and reduces bias relative to existing methods and 
maintains high accuracy in the face of demographic model misspecification, 
missing genotype calls, and genome inaccessibility. We apply ReLERNN to natural 
populations of African Drosophila melanogaster and show that genome-wide 
recombination landscapes, although largely correlated among populations, exhibit 
important population-specific differences. Lastly, we connect the inferred 
patterns of recombination with the frequencies of major inversions segregating 
in natural Drosophila populations.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa038
PMCID: PMC7253213
PMID: 32077950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1334. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1809-1818. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa045.

Practical Speedup of Bayesian Inference of Species Phylogenies by Restricting 
the Space of Gene Trees.

Wang Y(1), Ogilvie HA(1), Nakhleh L(1).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Department, Rice University, Houston, TX.

Species tree inference from multilocus data has emerged as a powerful paradigm 
in the postgenomic era, both in terms of the accuracy of the species tree it 
produces as well as in terms of elucidating the processes that shaped the 
evolutionary history. Bayesian methods for species tree inference are desirable 
in this area as they have been shown not only to yield accurate estimates, but 
also to naturally provide measures of confidence in those estimates. However, 
the heavy computational requirements of Bayesian inference have limited the 
applicability of such methods to very small data sets. In this article, we show 
that the computational efficiency of Bayesian inference under the multispecies 
coalescent can be improved in practice by restricting the space of the gene 
trees explored during the random walk, without sacrificing accuracy as measured 
by various metrics. The idea is to first infer constraints on the trees of the 
individual loci in the form of unresolved gene trees, and then to restrict the 
sampler to consider only resolutions of the constrained trees. We demonstrate 
the improvements gained by such an approach on both simulated and biological 
data.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa045
PMCID: PMC7253205
PMID: 32077947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1335. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):1882-1892. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa044.

Dynamic Evolution of De Novo DNA Methyltransferases in Rodent and Primate 
Genomes.

Molaro A(1), Malik HS(1)(2), Bourc'his D(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA.
(3)Institut Curie, PSL University, Inserm, CNRS, Paris, France.

Transcriptional silencing of retrotransposons via DNA methylation is paramount 
for mammalian fertility and reproductive fitness. During germ cell development, 
most mammalian species utilize the de novo DNA methyltransferases DNMT3A and 
DNMT3B to establish DNA methylation patterns. However, many rodent species 
deploy a third enzyme, DNMT3C, to selectively methylate the promoters of young 
retrotransposon insertions in their germline. The evolutionary forces that 
shaped DNMT3C's unique function are unknown. Using a phylogenomic approach, we 
confirm here that Dnmt3C arose through a single duplication of Dnmt3B that 
occurred ∼60 Ma in the last common ancestor of muroid rodents. Importantly, we 
reveal that DNMT3C is composed of two independently evolving segments: the 
latter two-thirds have undergone recurrent gene conversion with Dnmt3B, whereas 
the N-terminus has instead evolved under strong diversifying selection. We 
hypothesize that positive selection of Dnmt3C is the result of an ongoing 
evolutionary arms race with young retrotransposon lineages in muroid genomes. 
Interestingly, although primates lack DNMT3C, we find that the N-terminus of 
DNMT3A has also evolved under diversifying selection. Thus, the N-termini of two 
independent de novo methylation enzymes have evolved under diversifying 
selection in rodents and primates. We hypothesize that repression of young 
retrotransposons might be driving the recurrent innovation of a functional 
domain in the N-termini on germline DNMT3s in mammals.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa044
PMCID: PMC7306680
PMID: 32077945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1336. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1744-1760. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa043.

The Genome of Shaw's Sea Snake (Hydrophis curtus) Reveals Secondary Adaptation 
to Its Marine Environment.

Peng C(1), Ren JL(1)(2), Deng C(3), Jiang D(1), Wang J(4), Qu J(5), Chang J(6), 
Yan C(1), Jiang K(1), Murphy RW(7), Wu DD(8)(9), Li JT(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Mountain Ecological Restoration and Bioresource 
Utilization & Ecological Restoration and Biodiversity Conservation Key 
Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Chengdu, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, DNA Stories Bioinformatics Center, Chengdu, 
China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Hainan Normal University, Haikou, Hainan, China.
(5)College of Life Sciences, Yantai University, Yantai, Shandong, China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Criteria and Risk Assessment, Chinese 
Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Beijing, China.
(7)Center for Biodiversity, Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(9)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

The transition of terrestrial snakes to marine life ∼10 Ma is ideal for 
exploring adaptive evolution. Sea snakes possess phenotype specializations 
including laterally compressed bodies, paddle-shaped tails, valvular nostrils, 
cutaneous respiration, elongated lungs, and salt glands, yet, knowledge on the 
genetic underpinnings of the transition remains limited. Herein, we report the 
first genome of Shaw's sea snake (Hydrophis curtus) and use it to investigate 
sea snake secondary marine adaptation. A hybrid assembly strategy obtains a 
high-quality genome. Gene family analyses date a pulsed coding-gene expansion to 
∼20 Ma, and these genes associate strongly with adaptations to marine 
environments. Analyses of selection pressure and convergent evolution discover 
the rapid evolution of protein-coding genes, and some convergent features. 
Additionally, 108 conserved noncoding elements appear to have evolved quickly, 
and these may underpin the phenotypic changes. Transposon elements may 
contribute to adaptive specializations by inserting into genomic regions around 
functionally related coding genes. The integration of genomic and transcriptomic 
analyses indicates independent origins and different components in sea snake and 
terrestrial snake venom; the venom gland of the sea snake harbors the highest 
PLA2 (17.23%) expression in selected elapids and these genes may organize 
tandemly in the genome. These analyses provide insights into the genetic 
mechanisms that underlay the secondary adaptation to marine and venom production 
of this sea snake.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa043
PMID: 32077944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1337. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1694-1707. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa039.

Doublesex Mediates the Development of Sex-Specific Pheromone Organs in Bicyclus 
Butterflies via Multiple Mechanisms.

Prakash A(1), Monteiro A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.
(2)Yale-NUS College, Singapore.

The Bicyclus lineage of satyrid butterflies exhibits male-specific traits, the 
scent organs, used for chemical communication during courtship. These organs 
consist of tightly packed brush-like scales (hair-pencils) that rub against 
scent patches to disperse pheromones, but the evolution and molecular basis of 
these organ's male-limited development remains unknown. Here, we examine the 
evolution of the number and location of the scent patches and hair-pencils 
within 53 species of Bicyclus butterflies, and the involvement of the sex 
determinant gene doublesex (dsx) in scent organ development in Bicyclus anynana 
using CRISPR/Cas9. We show that scent patches and hair-pencils arose via 
multiple, independent gains, in a correlated manner. Further, an initially 
nonsex-specific Dsx protein expression pattern in developing wing discs becomes 
male-specific and spatially refined to areas that develop the scent patches. 
Functional perturbations of dsx show that this gene activates patch development 
in males whereas hair-pencils develop in both sexes without Dsx input. Dsx in 
females is, instead, required to repress hair-pencils whereas Dsx in males 
regulates minor aspects of its development. These findings suggest that the 
patches and hair-pencils evolve as correlated composite organs presumably due to 
their functional integration. Divergence in the function of dsx isoforms 
occurred across the sexes, where the male isoform promotes patch development in 
males and the female isoform represses hair-pencil development in females, both 
leading to the development of male-limited traits. Furthermore, evolution in 
number of patches in males is due to the evolution of spatial regulation of dsx.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa039
PMCID: PMC7253200
PMID: 32077943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1338. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1547-1562. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa002.

Disrupted Gene Networks in Subfertile Hybrid House Mice.

Morgan K(1), Harr B(2), White MA(3), Payseur BA(4), Turner LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Milner Centre for Evolution, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, 
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Biology, Plön, Germany.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GE.
(4)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI.

The Dobzhansky-Muller (DM) model provides a widely accepted mechanism for the 
evolution of reproductive isolation: incompatible substitutions disrupt 
interactions between genes. To date, few candidate incompatibility genes have 
been identified, leaving the genes driving speciation mostly uncharacterized. 
The importance of interactions in the DM model suggests that gene coexpression 
networks provide a powerful framework to understand disrupted pathways 
associated with postzygotic isolation. Here, we perform weighted gene 
coexpression network analysis to infer gene interactions in hybrids of two 
recently diverged European house mouse subspecies, Mus mus domesticus and M. m. 
musculus, which commonly show hybrid male sterility or subfertility. We use 
genome-wide testis expression data from 467 hybrid mice from two mapping 
populations: F2s from a laboratory cross between wild-derived pure subspecies 
strains and offspring of natural hybrids captured in the Central Europe hybrid 
zone. This large data set enabled us to build a robust consensus network using 
hybrid males with fertile phenotypes. We identify several expression modules, or 
groups of coexpressed genes, that are disrupted in subfertile hybrids, including 
modules functionally enriched for spermatogenesis, cilium and sperm flagellum 
organization, chromosome organization, and DNA repair, and including genes 
expressed in spermatogonia, spermatocytes, and spermatids. Our network-based 
approach enabled us to hone in on specific hub genes likely to be influencing 
module-wide gene expression and hence potentially driving large-effect DM 
incompatibilities. A disproportionate number of hub genes lie within sterility 
loci identified previously in the hybrid zone mapping population and represent 
promising candidate barrier genes and targets for future functional analysis.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa002
PMCID: PMC7253214
PMID: 32076722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1339. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1679-1693. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa036.

Dual Eigen-modules of Cis-Element Regulation Profiles and Selection of 
Cognition-Language Eigen-direction along Evolution in Hominidae.

Li L(1)(2), Zhang S(1)(2), Li LM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Center of Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Academy of 
Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
(3)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

To understand the genomic basis accounting for the phenotypic differences 
between human and apes, we compare the matrices consisting of the cis-element 
frequencies in the proximal regulatory regions of their genomes. One such 
frequency matrix is represented by a robust singular value decomposition. For 
each singular value, the negative and positive ends of the sorted motif 
eigenvector correspond to the dual ends of the sorted gene eigenvector, 
respectively, comprising a dual eigen-module defined by cis-regulatory element 
frequencies (CREF). The CREF eigen-modules at levels 1, 2, 3, and 6 are highly 
conserved across humans, chimpanzees, and orangutans. The key biological 
processes embedded in the top three CREF eigen-modules are reproduction versus 
embryogenesis, fetal maturation versus immune system, and stress responses 
versus mitosis. Although the divergence at the nucleotide level between the 
chimpanzee and human genome was small, their cis-element frequency matrices 
crossed a singularity point, at which the fourth and fifth singular values were 
identical. The CREF eigen-modules corresponding to the fourth and fifth singular 
values were reorganized along the evolution from apes to human. Interestingly, 
the fourth sorted gene eigenvector encodes the phenotypes unique to human such 
as long-term memory, language development, and social behavior. The number of 
motifs present on Alu elements increases substantially at the fourth level. The 
motif analysis together with the cases of human-specific Alu insertions suggests 
that mutations related to Alu elements play a critical role in the evolution of 
the human-phenotypic gene eigenvector.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa036
PMCID: PMC10615152
PMID: 32068872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1340. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2430-2439. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa037.

Synonymous Site-to-Site Substitution Rate Variation Dramatically Inflates False 
Positive Rates of Selection Analyses: Ignore at Your Own Peril.

Wisotsky SR(1)(2), Kosakovsky Pond SL(2), Shank SD(2), Muse SV(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.
(2)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.

Most molecular evolutionary studies of natural selection maintain the 
decades-old assumption that synonymous substitution rate variation (SRV) across 
sites within genes occurs at levels that are either nonexistent or negligible. 
However, numerous studies challenge this assumption from a biological 
perspective and show that SRV is comparable in magnitude to that of 
nonsynonymous substitution rate variation. We evaluated the impact of this 
assumption on methods for inferring selection at the molecular level by 
incorporating SRV into an existing method (BUSTED) for detecting signatures of 
episodic diversifying selection in genes. Using simulated data we found that 
failing to account for even moderate levels of SRV in selection testing is 
likely to produce intolerably high false positive rates. To evaluate the effect 
of the SRV assumption on actual inferences we compared results of tests with and 
without the assumption in an empirical analysis of over 13,000 Euteleostomi 
(bony vertebrate) gene alignments from the Selectome database. This exercise 
reveals that close to 50% of positive results (i.e., evidence for selection) in 
empirical analyses disappear when SRV is modeled as part of the statistical 
analysis and are thus candidates for being false positives. The results from 
this work add to a growing literature establishing that tests of selection are 
much more sensitive to certain model assumptions than previously believed.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa037
PMCID: PMC7403620
PMID: 32068869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1341. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1727-1743. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa041.

Pervasive Suicidal Integrases in Deep-Sea Archaea.

Badel C(1), Da Cunha V(1), Forterre P(1)(2), Oberto J(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Department, Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell 
(I2BC), CEA, CNRS, University of Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 
Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.
(2)Unité de Biologie Moléculaire du Gène chez les Extrêmophiles, Département de 
Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Mobile genetic elements (MGEs) often encode integrases which catalyze the 
site-specific insertion of their genetic information into the host genome and 
the reverse reaction of excision. Hyperthermophilic archaea harbor integrases 
belonging to the SSV-family which carry the MGE recombination site within their 
open reading frame. Upon integration into the host genome, SSV integrases 
disrupt their own gene into two inactive pseudogenes and are termed suicidal for 
this reason. The evolutionary maintenance of suicidal integrases, concurring 
with the high prevalence and multiples recruitments of these recombinases by 
archaeal MGEs, is highly paradoxical. To elucidate this phenomenon, we analyzed 
the wide phylogenomic distribution of a prominent class of suicidal integrases 
which revealed a highly variable integration site specificity. Our results 
highlighted the remarkable hybrid nature of these enzymes encoded from the 
assembly of inactive pseudogenes of different origins. The characterization of 
the biological properties of one of these integrases, IntpT26-2 showed that this 
enzyme was active over a wide range of temperatures up to 99 °C and displayed a 
less-stringent site specificity requirement than comparable integrases. These 
observations concurred in explaining the pervasiveness of these suicidal 
integrases in the most hyperthermophilic organisms. The biochemical and 
phylogenomic data presented here revealed a target site switching system 
operating on highly thermostable integrases and suggested a new model for split 
gene reconstitution. By generating fast-evolving pseudogenes at high frequency, 
suicidal integrases constitute a powerful model to approach the molecular 
mechanisms involved in the generation of active genes variants by the 
recombination of proto-genes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa041
PMCID: PMC7253208
PMID: 32068866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1342. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jul 1;37(7):2124-2136. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa042.

Inferring the Demographic History of Inbred Species from Genome-Wide SNP 
Frequency Data.

Blischak PD(1)(2), Barker MS(1), Gutenkunst RN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ.

Demographic inference using the site frequency spectrum (SFS) is a common way to 
understand historical events affecting genetic variation. However, most methods 
for estimating demography from the SFS assume random mating within populations, 
precluding these types of analyses in inbred populations. To address this issue, 
we developed a model for the expected SFS that includes inbreeding by 
parameterizing individual genotypes using beta-binomial distributions. We then 
take the convolution of these genotype probabilities to calculate the expected 
frequency of biallelic variants in the population. Using simulations, we 
evaluated the model's ability to coestimate demography and inbreeding using one- 
and two-population models across a range of inbreeding levels. We also applied 
our method to two empirical examples, American pumas (Puma concolor) and 
domesticated cabbage (Brassica oleracea var. capitata), inferring models both 
with and without inbreeding to compare parameter estimates and model fit. Our 
simulations showed that we are able to accurately coestimate demographic 
parameters and inbreeding even for highly inbred populations (F = 0.9). In 
contrast, failing to include inbreeding generally resulted in inaccurate 
parameter estimates in simulated data and led to poor model fit in our empirical 
analyses. These results show that inbreeding can have a strong effect on 
demographic inference, a pattern that was especially noticeable for parameters 
involving changes in population size. Given the importance of these estimates 
for informing practices in conservation, agriculture, and elsewhere, our method 
provides an important advancement for accurately estimating the demographic 
histories of these species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa042
PMCID: PMC7828618
PMID: 32068861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1343. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1667-1678. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa035.

Evolutionary Analysis of the Bacillus subtilis Genome Reveals New Genes Involved 
in Sporulation.

Shi L(1), Derouiche A(1), Pandit S(1), Rahimi S(1), Kalantari A(1), Futo M(2), 
Ravikumar V(3), Jers C(3), Mokkapati VRSS(1), Vlahoviček K(4)(5), Mijakovic 
I(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Systems and Synthetic Biology Division, Department of Biology and Biological 
Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics, Division of Molecular Biology, Ruđer 
Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(4)Bioinformatics group, Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, 
Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Croatia.
(5)School of Bioscience, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden.

Bacilli can form dormant, highly resistant, and metabolically inactive spores to 
cope with extreme environmental challenges. In this study, we examined the 
evolutionary age of Bacillus subtilis sporulation genes using the approach known 
as genomic phylostratigraphy. We found that B. subtilis sporulation genes 
cluster in several groups that emerged at distant evolutionary time-points, 
suggesting that the sporulation process underwent several stages of expansion. 
Next, we asked whether such evolutionary stratification of the genome could be 
used to predict involvement in sporulation of presently uncharacterized genes 
(y-genes). We individually inactivated a representative sample of 
uncharacterized genes that arose during the same evolutionary periods as the 
known sporulation genes and tested the resulting strains for sporulation 
phenotypes. Sporulation was significantly affected in 16 out of 37 (43%) tested 
strains. In addition to expanding the knowledge base on B. subtilis sporulation, 
our findings suggest that evolutionary age could be used to help with genome 
mining.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa035
PMCID: PMC7426031
PMID: 32061128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1344. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1657-1666. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa034.

Duplications and Functional Convergence of Intestinal Carbohydrate-Digesting 
Enzymes.

Brun A(1)(2), Mendez-Aranda D(3), Magallanes ME(2), Karasov WH(1), Martínez Del 
Rio C(4), Baldwin MW(3), Caviedes-Vidal E(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forest and Wildlife Ecology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI.
(2)Instituto Multidisciplinario de Investigaciones Biológicas de San Luis, 
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Argentina.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, Seewiesen, Germany.
(4)Department of Zoology and Physiology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY.
(5)Departamento de Bioquímica y Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional de San 
Luis, San Luis, Argentina.

Vertebrate diets and digestive physiologies vary tremendously. Although the 
contribution of ecological and behavioral features to such diversity is well 
documented, the roles and identities of individual intestinal enzymes shaping 
digestive traits remain largely unexplored. Here, we show that the 
sucrase-isomaltase (SI)/maltase-glucoamylase (MGAM) dual enzyme system long 
assumed to be the conserved disaccharide and starch digestion framework in all 
vertebrates is absent in many lineages. Our analyses indicate that independent 
duplications of an ancestral SI gave rise to the mammalian-specific MGAM, as 
well as to other duplicates in fish and birds. Strikingly, the duplicated avian 
enzyme exhibits similar activities to MGAM, revealing an unexpected case of 
functional convergence. Our results highlight digestive enzyme variation as a 
key uncharacterized component of dietary diversity in vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa034
PMID: 32061124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1345. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1621-1636. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa031.

Correlated Evolution of Large DNA Fragments in the 3D Genome of Arabidopsis 
thaliana.

Yan Y(1), Li Z(1), Li Y(1), Wu Z(1), Yang R(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.

In eukaryotes, the three-dimensional (3D) conformation of the genome is far from 
random, and this nonrandom chromatin organization is strongly correlated with 
gene expression and protein function, which are two critical determinants of the 
selective constraints and evolutionary rates of genes. However, whether genes 
and other elements that are located close to each other in the 3D genome evolve 
in a coordinated way has not been investigated in any organism. To address this 
question, we constructed chromatin interaction networks (CINs) in Arabidopsis 
thaliana based on high-throughput chromosome conformation capture data and 
demonstrated that adjacent large DNA fragments in the CIN indeed exhibit more 
similar levels of polymorphism and evolutionary rates than random fragment 
pairs. Using simulations that account for the linear distance between fragments, 
we proved that the 3D chromosomal organization plays a role in the observed 
correlated evolution. Spatially interacting fragments also exhibit more similar 
mutation rates and functional constraints in both coding and noncoding regions 
than the random expectations, indicating that the correlated evolution between 
3D neighbors is a result of combined evolutionary forces. A collection of 39 
genomic and epigenomic features can explain much of the variance in genetic 
diversity and evolutionary rates across the genome. Moreover, features that have 
a greater effect on the evolution of regional sequences tend to show higher 
similarity between neighboring fragments in the CIN, suggesting a pivotal role 
of epigenetic modifications and chromatin organization in determining the 
correlated evolution of large DNA fragments in the 3D genome.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa031
PMID: 32044988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1346. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1637-1646. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa032.

Population Bottlenecks Strongly Influence the Evolutionary Trajectory to 
Fluoroquinolone Resistance in Escherichia coli.

Garoff L(1), Pietsch F(1), Huseby DL(1), Lilja T(1), Brandis G(1), Hughes D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Biomedical Center, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Experimental evolution is a powerful tool to study genetic trajectories to 
antibiotic resistance under selection. A confounding factor is that outcomes may 
be heavily influenced by the choice of experimental parameters. For practical 
purposes (minimizing culture volumes), most experimental evolution studies with 
bacteria use transmission bottleneck sizes of 5 × 106 cfu. We currently have a 
poor understanding of how the choice of transmission bottleneck size affects the 
accumulation of deleterious versus high-fitness mutations when resistance 
requires multiple mutations, and how this relates outcome to clinical 
resistance. We addressed this using experimental evolution of resistance to 
ciprofloxacin in Escherichia coli. Populations were passaged with three 
different transmission bottlenecks, including single cell (to maximize genetic 
drift) and bottlenecks spanning the reciprocal of the frequency of drug target 
mutations (108 and 1010). The 1010 bottlenecks selected overwhelmingly mutations 
in drug target genes, and the resulting genotypes corresponded closely to those 
found in resistant clinical isolates. In contrast, both the 108 and single-cell 
bottlenecks selected mutations in three different gene classes: 1) drug targets, 
2) efflux pump repressors, and 3) transcription-translation genes, including 
many mutations with low fitness. Accordingly, bottlenecks smaller than the 
average nucleotide substitution rate significantly altered the experimental 
outcome away from genotypes observed in resistant clinical isolates. These data 
could be applied in designing experimental evolution studies to increase their 
predictive power and to explore the interplay between different environmental 
conditions, where transmission bottlenecks might vary, and resulting 
evolutionary trajectories.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa032
PMCID: PMC7253196
PMID: 32031639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1347. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1593-1603. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa027.

Cis- and Trans-Regulatory Variations in the Domestication of the Chili Pepper 
Fruit.

Díaz-Valenzuela E(1), Sawers RH(2), Cibrián-Jaramillo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Ecological and Evolutionary Genomics Laboratory, Unidad de Genomica Avanzada 
(Langebio), Irapuato, Guanajuato, México.
(2)Department of Plant Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park State College, University Park, PA.

The process of domestication requires the rapid transformation of the wild 
morphology into the cultivated forms that humans select for. This process often 
takes place through changes in the regulation of genes, yet, there is no 
definite pattern on the role of cis- and trans-acting regulatory variations in 
the domestication of the fruit among crops. Using allele-specific expression and 
network analyses, we characterized the regulatory patterns and the inheritance 
of gene expression in wild and cultivated accessions of chili pepper, a crop 
with remarkable fruit morphological variation. We propose that gene expression 
differences associated to the cultivated form are best explained by 
cis-regulatory hubs acting through trans-regulatory cascades. We show that in 
cultivated chili, the expression of genes associated with fruit morphology is 
partially recessive with respect to those in the wild relative, consistent with 
the hybrid fruit phenotype. Decreased expression of fruit maturation and growth 
genes in cultivated chili suggest that selection for loss-of-function took place 
in its domestication. Trans-regulatory changes underlie the majority of the 
genes showing regulatory divergence and had larger effect sizes on gene 
expression than cis-regulatory variants. Network analysis of selected 
cis-regulated genes, including ARP9 and MED25, indicated their interaction with 
many transcription factors involved in organ growth and fruit ripening. 
Differentially expressed genes linked to cis-regulatory variants and their 
interactions with downstream trans-acting genes have the potential to drive the 
morphological differences observed between wild and cultivated fruits and 
provide an attractive mechanism of morphological transformation during the 
domestication of the chili pepper.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa027
PMCID: PMC7253206
PMID: 32031611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1348. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1577-1592. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa026.

Out of Tibet: Genomic Perspectives on the Evolutionary History of Extant Pikas.

Wang X(1), Liang D(1), Jin W(2), Tang M(2), Liu S(2), Zhang P(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, College of Ecology and Evolution, School 
of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Sichuan Academy of Forestry, Chengdu, China.

Pikas are widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere and are highly adapted 
to cold and alpine environments. They are one of the most complex and 
problematic groups in mammalian systematics, and the origin and evolutionary 
history of extant pikas remain controversial. In this study, we sequenced the 
whole coding sequences of 105 pika samples (29 named species and 1 putative new 
species) and obtained DNA data for more than 10,000 genes. Our phylogenomic 
analyses recognized four subgenera of extant pikas: Alienauroa, Conothoa, 
Ochotona, and Pika. The interrelationships between the four subgenera were 
strongly resolved as (Conothoa, (Alienauroa, (Ochotona, Pika))), with the 
mountain group Conothoa being the sister group of all other pikas. Our 
divergence time and phylogeographic analyses indicated that the last common 
ancestor of extant pikas first occurred on in the middle Miocene, ∼14 Ma. The 
emergence of opportunities related to the climate, food supply, and spreading 
paths in concert promoted the dispersal of pikas from the Qinghai-Tibetan 
Plateau (QTP) to other parts of Eurasia and North America. We found that the 
genes that were positively selected in the early evolution of pikas were most 
concentrated in functional categories related to cold tolerance. These results 
suggest that the QTP may have served as a training ground for cold tolerance in 
early pikas, which gives pikas a great advantage when the climate continued to 
cool after the middle Miocene. Our study highlights the importance of the QTP as 
a center of origin for many cold-adapted animals.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa026
PMID: 32027372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1349. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1535-1542. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa025.

CellCoal: Coalescent Simulation of Single-Cell Sequencing Samples.

Posada D(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Immunology, University of Vigo, 
Vigo, Spain.
(2)Biomedical Research Center (CINBIO), University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
(3)Galicia Sur Health Research Institute, Vigo, Spain.

Our capacity to study individual cells has enabled a new level of resolution for 
understanding complex biological systems such as multicellular organisms or 
microbial communities. Not surprisingly, several methods have been developed in 
recent years with a formidable potential to investigate the somatic evolution of 
single cells in both healthy and pathological tissues. However, single-cell 
sequencing data can be quite noisy due to different technical biases, so 
inferences resulting from these new methods need to be carefully contrasted. 
Here, I introduce CellCoal, a software tool for the coalescent simulation of 
single-cell sequencing genotypes. CellCoal simulates the history of single-cell 
samples obtained from somatic cell populations with different demographic 
histories and produces single-nucleotide variants under a variety of mutation 
models, sequencing read counts, and genotype likelihoods, considering allelic 
imbalance, allelic dropout, amplification, and sequencing errors, typical of 
this type of data. CellCoal is a flexible tool that can be used to understand 
the implications of different somatic evolutionary processes at the single-cell 
level, and to benchmark dedicated bioinformatic tools for the analysis of 
single-cell sequencing data. CellCoal is available at 
https://github.com/dapogon/cellcoal.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa025
PMCID: PMC7182211
PMID: 32027371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1350. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1563-1576. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa024.

Evolving Populations in Biofilms Contain More Persistent Plasmids.

Stalder T(1)(2)(3), Cornwell B(1), Lacroix J(1), Kohler B(1), Dixon S(1), Yano 
H(4), Kerr B(3)(5), Forney LJ(1)(2), Top EM(1)(2)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID.
(2)Institute for Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Studies, University of Idaho, 
Moscow, ID.
(3)BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action.
(4)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

Bacterial plasmids substantially contribute to the rapid spread of antibiotic 
resistance, which is a crisis in healthcare today. Coevolution of plasmids and 
their hosts promotes this spread of resistance by ameliorating the cost of 
plasmid carriage. However, our knowledge of plasmid-bacteria coevolution is 
solely based on studies done in well-mixed liquid cultures, even though biofilms 
represent the main way of bacterial life on Earth and are responsible for most 
infections. The spatial structure and the heterogeneity provided by biofilms are 
known to lead to increased genetic diversity as compared with well-mixed 
liquids. Therefore, we expect that growth in this complex environment could 
affect the evolutionary trajectories of plasmid-host dyads. We experimentally 
evolved Shewanella oneidensis MR-1 with plasmid pBP136Gm in biofilms and 
chemostats and sequenced the genomes of clones and populations. Biofilm 
populations not only maintained a higher diversity of mutations than chemostat 
populations but contained a few clones with markedly more persistent plasmids 
that evolved via multiple distinct trajectories. These included the acquisition 
of a putative toxin-antitoxin transposon by the plasmid and chromosomal 
mutations. Some of these genetic changes resulted in loss of plasmid 
transferability or decrease in plasmid cost. Growth in chemostats led to a 
higher proportion of variants with decreased plasmid persistence, a phenomenon 
not detected in biofilms. We suggest that the presence of more stable 
plasmid-host dyads in biofilms reflects higher genetic diversity and possibly 
unknown selection pressures. Overall, this study underscores the importance of 
the mode of growth in the evolution of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa024
PMCID: PMC7253198
PMID: 32027370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1351. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1604-1614. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa028.

Phenotypic Convergence Is Not Mirrored at the Protein Level in a Lizard Adaptive 
Radiation.

Corbett-Detig RB(1)(2), Russell SL(3), Nielsen R(1)(4), Losos J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.
(2)Department of Biomolecular Engineering and Genomics Institute, University of 
California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA.
(4)Centre for GeoGenetics, Globe Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Biology and Living Earth Collaborative, Washington University, 
Saint Louis, MO.

There are many compelling examples of molecular convergence at individual genes. 
However, the prevalence and the relative importance of adaptive genome-wide 
convergence remain largely unknown. Many recent works have reported striking 
examples of excess genome-wide convergence, but some of these studies have been 
called into question because of the use of inappropriate null models. Here, we 
sequenced and compared the genomes of 12 species of anole lizards that have 
independently converged on suites of adaptive behavioral and morphological 
traits. Despite extensive searches for a genome-wide signature of molecular 
convergence, we found no evidence supporting molecular convergence at specific 
amino acids either at individual genes or at genome-wide comparisons; we also 
uncovered no evidence supporting an excess of adaptive convergence in the rates 
of amino acid substitutions within genes. Our findings indicate that 
comprehensive phenotypic convergence is not mirrored at genome-wide 
protein-coding levels in anoles, and therefore, that adaptive phenotypic 
convergence is likely not constrained by the evolution of many specific protein 
sequences or structures.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa028
PMID: 32027369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1352. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1615-1620. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa029.

Extensive Shifts from Cis- to Trans-splicing of Gymnosperm Mitochondrial 
Introns.

Guo W(1)(2), Zhu A(1)(3)(4), Fan W(1)(3)(4), Adams RP(5), Mower JP(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Plant Science Innovation, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
(3)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
(4)Germplasm Bank of Wild Species, Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(5)Biology Department, Baylor University, Waco, TX.

Hundreds of plant mitogenomes have been sequenced from angiosperms, but 
relatively few mitogenomes are available from its sister lineage, gymnosperms. 
To examine mitogenomic diversity among extant gymnosperms, we generated draft 
mitogenomes from 11 diverse species and compared them with four previously 
published mitogenomes. Examined mitogenomes from Pinaceae and cycads retained 
all 41 protein genes and 26 introns present in the common ancestor of seed 
plants, whereas gnetophyte and cupressophyte mitogenomes experienced extensive 
gene and intron loss. In Pinaceae and cupressophyte mitogenomes, an 
unprecedented number of exons are distantly dispersed, requiring trans-splicing 
of 50-70% of mitochondrial introns to generate mature transcripts. RNAseq data 
confirm trans-splicing of these dispersed exons in Pinus. The prevalence of 
trans-splicing in vascular plant lineages with recombinogenic mitogenomes 
suggests that genomic rearrangement is the primary cause of shifts from cis- to 
trans-splicing in plant mitochondria.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa029
PMID: 32027368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1353. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1243-1258. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa014.

Evolution of the Autism-Associated Neuroligin-4 Gene Reveals Broad Erosion of 
Pseudoautosomal Regions in Rodents.

Maxeiner S(1)(2)(3), Benseler F(4), Krasteva-Christ G(3), Brose N(4), Südhof 
TC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA.
(3)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Saarland University, Homburg, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute of Experimental 
Medicine, Göttingen, Germany.

Variants in genes encoding synaptic adhesion proteins of the neuroligin family, 
most notably neuroligin-4, are a significant cause of autism spectrum disorders 
in humans. Although human neuroligin-4 is encoded by two genes, NLGN4X and 
NLGN4Y, that are localized on the X-specific and male-specific regions of the 
two sex chromosomes, the chromosomal localization and full genomic sequence of 
the mouse Nlgn4 gene remain elusive. Here, we analyzed the neuroligin-4 genes of 
numerous rodent species by direct sequencing and bioinformatics, generated 
complete drafts of multiple rodent neuroligin-4 genes, and examined their 
evolution. Surprisingly, we find that the murine Nlgn4 gene is localized to the 
pseudoautosomal region (PAR) of the sex chromosomes, different from its human 
orthologs. We show that the sequence differences between various neuroligin-4 
proteins are restricted to hotspots in which rodent neuroligin-4 proteins 
contain short repetitive sequence insertions compared with neuroligin-4 proteins 
from other species, whereas all other protein sequences are highly conserved. 
Evolutionarily, these sequence insertions initiate in the clade eumuroidea of 
the infraorder myomorpha and are additionally associated with dramatic changes 
in noncoding sequences and gene size. Importantly, these changes are not 
exclusively restricted to neuroligin-4 genes but reflect major evolutionary 
changes that substantially altered or even deleted genes from the PARs of both 
sex chromosomes. Our results show that despite the fact that the PAR in rodents 
and the neuroligin-4 genes within the rodent PAR underwent massive evolutionary 
changes, neuroligin-4 proteins maintained a highly conserved core structure, 
consistent with a substantial evolutionary pressure preserving its physiological 
function.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa014
PMCID: PMC7182215
PMID: 32011705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1354. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1845. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz281.

Corrigendum to: Family-joining: A fast distance-based method for constructing 
generally labeled trees.

Kalaghatgi P, Pfeifer N, Lengauer T.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Oct;33(10):2720-34.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz281
PMCID: PMC7253203
PMID: 32011703


1355. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1530-1534. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa015.

IQ-TREE 2: New Models and Efficient Methods for Phylogenetic Inference in the 
Genomic Era.

Minh BQ(1)(2), Schmidt HA(3), Chernomor O(3), Schrempf D(3)(4), Woodhams MD(5), 
von Haeseler A(3)(6), Lanfear R(2).

Author information:
(1)Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University, 
Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Research School of Biology, Australian 
National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(3)Center for Integrative Bioinformatics Vienna, Max Perutz Labs, University of 
Vienna and Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Biological Physics, Eötvös Lórand University, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(5)Discipline of Mathematics, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia.
(6)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Faculty of Computer Science, 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2461.

IQ-TREE (http://www.iqtree.org, last accessed February 6, 2020) is a 
user-friendly and widely used software package for phylogenetic inference using 
maximum likelihood. Since the release of version 1 in 2014, we have continuously 
expanded IQ-TREE to integrate a plethora of new models of sequence evolution and 
efficient computational approaches of phylogenetic inference to deal with 
genomic data. Here, we describe notable features of IQ-TREE version 2 and 
highlight the key advantages over other software.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa015
PMCID: PMC7182206
PMID: 32011700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1356. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2414-2429. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa016.

Jointly Inferring the Dynamics of Population Size and Sampling Intensity from 
Molecular Sequences.

Parag KV(1)(2), du Plessis L(1), Pybus OG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, MRC Centre for Global 
Infectious Disease Analysis, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Estimating past population dynamics from molecular sequences that have been 
sampled longitudinally through time is an important problem in infectious 
disease epidemiology, molecular ecology, and macroevolution. Popular solutions, 
such as the skyline and skygrid methods, infer past effective population sizes 
from the coalescent event times of phylogenies reconstructed from sampled 
sequences but assume that sequence sampling times are uninformative about 
population size changes. Recent work has started to question this assumption by 
exploring how sampling time information can aid coalescent inference. Here, we 
develop, investigate, and implement a new skyline method, termed the epoch 
sampling skyline plot (ESP), to jointly estimate the dynamics of population size 
and sampling rate through time. The ESP is inspired by real-world data 
collection practices and comprises a flexible model in which the sequence 
sampling rate is proportional to the population size within an epoch but can 
change discontinuously between epochs. We show that the ESP is accurate under 
several realistic sampling protocols and we prove analytically that it can at 
least double the best precision achievable by standard approaches. We generalize 
the ESP to incorporate phylogenetic uncertainty in a new Bayesian package (BESP) 
in BEAST2. We re-examine two well-studied empirical data sets from virus 
epidemiology and molecular evolution and find that the BESP improves upon 
previous coalescent estimators and generates new, biologically useful insights 
into the sampling protocols underpinning these data sets. Sequence sampling 
times provide a rich source of information for coalescent inference that will 
become increasingly important as sequence collection intensifies and becomes 
more formalized.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa016
PMCID: PMC7403618
PMID: 32003829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1357. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1342-1349. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa008.

Independent Losses of the Hypoxia-Inducible Factor (HIF) Pathway within 
Crustacea.

Graham AM(1), Barreto FS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR.

Metazoans respond to hypoxic stress via the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) 
pathway, a mechanism thought to be extremely conserved due to its importance in 
monitoring cellular oxygen levels and regulating responses to hypoxia. However, 
recent work revealed that key members of the HIF pathway have been lost in 
specific lineages (a tardigrade and a copepod), suggesting that this pathway is 
not as widespread in animals as previously assumed. Using genomic and 
transcriptomic data from 70 different species across 12 major crustacean groups, 
we assessed the degree to which the gene HIFα, the master regulator of the HIF 
pathway, was conserved. Mining of protein domains, followed by phylogenetic 
analyses of gene families, uncovered group-level losses of HIFα, including one 
across three orders within Cirripedia, and in three orders within Copepoda. For 
these groups, additional assessment showed losses of HIF repression machinery 
(EGLN and VHL). These results suggest the existence of alternative mechanisms 
for cellular response to low oxygen and highlight these taxa as models useful 
for probing these evolutionary outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa008
PMID: 32003807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1358. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1844. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz286.

Erratum to: Developmental systems drift and the drivers of sex chromosome 
evolution.

Cauret CMS, Gansauge MT, Tupper AS, Furman BLS, Knytl M, Song X, Greenbaum E, 
Meyer M, Evans BJ.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):799-810.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz286
PMID: 32003798


1359. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):301-303. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz293.

Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution, Council and Business Meetings, 
2019, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Pollock DD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz293
PMCID: PMC8344300
PMID: 31986214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1360. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):300. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz277.

A Report by the Editor-in-Chief for Molecular Biology and Evolution (MBE), 
Volume 35.

Kumar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Temple University, Institute for Genomics and 
Evolutionary Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz277
PMID: 31986213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1361. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1329-1341. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa007.

Evolution of a New Function by Fusion between Phage DNA and a Bacterial Gene.

Warsi O(1), Knopp M(1), Surkov S(1), Jerlström Hultqvist J(2), Andersson DI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, NS, Canada.

Mobile genetic elements, such as plasmids, phages, and transposons, are 
important sources for evolution of novel functions. In this study, we performed 
a large-scale screening of metagenomic phage libraries for their ability to 
suppress temperature-sensitivity in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 
strain LT2 mutants to examine how phage DNA could confer evolutionary novelty to 
bacteria. We identified an insert encoding 23 amino acids from a phage that when 
fused with a bacterial DNA-binding repressor protein (LacI) resulted in the 
formation of a chimeric protein that localized to the outer membrane. This 
relocalization of the chimeric protein resulted in increased membrane vesicle 
formation and an associated suppression of the temperature sensitivity of the 
bacterium. Both the host LacI protein and the extracellular 23-amino acid 
stretch are necessary for the generation of the novel phenotype. Furthermore, 
mutational analysis of the chimeric protein showed that although the native 
repressor function of the LacI protein is maintained in this chimeric structure, 
it is not necessary for the new function. Thus, our study demonstrates how a 
gene fusion between foreign DNA and bacterial DNA can generate novelty without 
compromising the native function of a given gene.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa007
PMCID: PMC7182210
PMID: 31977019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1362. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1362-1375. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa010.

Evolutionary Dynamics of Abundant 7-bp Satellites in the Genome of Drosophila 
virilis.

Flynn JM(1), Long M(2), Wing RA(3), Clark AG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(3)School of Plant Sciences, Arizona Genomics Institute, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ.

The factors that drive the rapid changes in abundance of tandem arrays of highly 
repetitive sequences, known as satellite DNA, are not well understood. 
Drosophila virilis has one of the highest relative amounts of simple satellites 
of any organism that has been studied, with an estimated >40% of its genome 
composed of a few related 7-bp satellites. Here, we use D. virilis as a model to 
understand technical biases affecting satellite sequencing and the evolutionary 
processes that drive satellite composition. By analyzing sequencing data from 
Illumina, PacBio, and Nanopore platforms, we identify platform-specific biases 
and suggest best practices for accurate characterization of satellites by 
sequencing. We use comparative genomics and cytogenetics to demonstrate that the 
highly abundant AAACTAC satellite family arose from a related satellite in the 
branch leading to the virilis phylad 4.5-11 Ma before exploding in abundance in 
some species of the clade. The most abundant satellite is conserved in sequence 
and location in the pericentromeric region but has diverged widely in abundance 
among species, whereas the satellites nearest the centromere are rapidly turning 
over in sequence composition. By analyzing multiple strains of D. virilis, we 
saw that the abundances of two centromere-proximal satellites are anticorrelated 
along a geographical gradient, which we suggest could be caused by ongoing 
conflicts at the centromere. In conclusion, we illuminate several key attributes 
of satellite evolutionary dynamics that we hypothesize to be driven by processes 
including selection, meiotic drive, and constraints on satellite sequence and 
abundance.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa010
PMCID: PMC7849990
PMID: 31960929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1363. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1350-1361. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa009.

Evolution of Transcriptional Repressors Impacts Caenorhabditis Vulval 
Development.

Chamberlin HM(1), Jain IM(2), Corchado-Sonera M(1), Kelley LH(1), Sharanya D(2), 
Jama A(1), Pabla R(2), Dawes AT(1)(3), Gupta BP(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
(2)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

Comparative genomic sequence analysis has found that the genes for many 
chromatin-associated proteins are poorly conserved, but the biological 
consequences of these sequence changes are not understood. Here, we show that 
four genes identified for an Inappropriate Vulval cell Proliferation (ivp) 
phenotype in the nematode Caenorhabditis briggsae exhibit distinct functions and 
genetic interactions when compared with their orthologs in C. elegans. 
Specifically, we show that the four C. briggsae ivp genes encode the 
noncanonical histone HTZ-1/H2A.z and three nematode-specific proteins predicted 
to function in the nucleus. The mutants exhibit ectopic vulval precursor cell 
proliferation (the multivulva [Muv] phenotype) due to inappropriate expression 
of the lin-3/EGF gene, and RNAseq analysis suggests a broad role for these ivp 
genes in transcriptional repression. Importantly, although the C. briggsae 
phenotypes have parallels with those seen in the C. elegans synMuv system, 
except for the highly conserved HTZ-1/H2A.z, comparable mutations in C. elegans 
ivp orthologs do not exhibit synMuv gene interactions or phenotypes. These 
results demonstrate the evolutionary changes that can underlie conserved 
biological outputs and argue that proteins critical to repress inappropriate 
expression from the genome participate in a rapidly evolving functional 
landscape.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa009
PMCID: PMC7182219
PMID: 31960924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1364. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1376-1386. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa011.

The Genomes of the Livebearing Fish Species Poeciliopsis retropinna and 
Poeciliopsis turrubarensis Reflect Their Different Reproductive Strategies.

van Kruistum H(1)(2), Guernsey MW(3), Baker JC(3), Kloet SL(4), Groenen MAM(1), 
Pollux BJA(2), Megens HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Breeding and Genomics Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Experimental Zoology Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.

The evolution of a placenta is predicted to be accompanied by rapid evolution of 
genes involved in processes that regulate mother-offspring interactions during 
pregnancy, such as placenta formation, embryonic development, and nutrient 
transfer to offspring. However, these predictions have only been tested in 
mammalian species, where only a single instance of placenta evolution has 
occurred. In this light, the genus Poeciliopsis is a particularly interesting 
model for placenta evolution, because in this genus a placenta has evolved 
independently from the mammalian placenta. Here, we present and compare genome 
assemblies of two species of the livebearing fish genus Poeciliopsis (family 
Poeciliidae) that differ in their reproductive strategy: Poeciliopsis retropinna 
which has a well-developed complex placenta and P. turrubarensis which lacks a 
placenta. We applied different assembly strategies for each species: PacBio 
sequencing for P. retropinna (622-Mb assembly, scaffold N50 of 21.6 Mb) and 10× 
Genomics Chromium technology for P. turrubarensis (597-Mb assembly, scaffold N50 
of 4.2 Mb). Using the high contiguity of these genome assemblies and 
near-completeness of gene annotations to our advantage, we searched for gene 
duplications and performed a genome-wide scan for genes evolving under positive 
selection. We find rapid evolution in major parts of several molecular pathways 
involved in parent-offspring interaction in P. retropinna, both in the form of 
gene duplications as well as positive selection. We conclude that the evolution 
of the placenta in the genus Poeciliopsis is accompanied by rapid evolution of 
genes involved in similar genomic pathways as found in mammals.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa011
PMCID: PMC7182214
PMID: 31960923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1365. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1306-1316. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa005.

Genome-Wide Natural Selection Signatures Are Linked to Genetic Risk of Modern 
Phenotypes in the Japanese Population.

Yasumizu Y(1), Sakaue S(2)(3)(4), Konuma T(2), Suzuki K(2), Matsuda K(5), 
Murakami Y(6), Kubo M(7), Palamara PF(8), Kamatani Y(4)(9), Okada Y(2)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(2)Department of Statistical Genetics, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suita, Japan.
(3)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical 
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(5)Department of Computational Biology and Medical Science, Graduate school of 
Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Division of Molecular Pathology, The Institute of Medical Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(8)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(9)Laboratory of Complex Trait Genomics, Department of Computational Biology and 
Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Laboratory of Statistical Immunology, Immunology Frontier Research Center 
(WPI-IFReC), Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(11)Integrated Frontier Research for Medical Science Division, Institute for 
Open and Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

Elucidation of natural selection signatures and relationships with phenotype 
spectra is important to understand adaptive evolution of modern humans. Here, we 
conducted a genome-wide scan of selection signatures of the Japanese population 
by estimating locus-specific time to the most recent common ancestor using the 
ascertained sequentially Markovian coalescent (ASMC), from the biobank-based 
large-scale genome-wide association study data of 170,882 subjects. We 
identified 29 genetic loci with selection signatures satisfying the genome-wide 
significance. The signatures were most evident at the alcohol dehydrogenase 
(ADH) gene cluster locus at 4q23 (PASMC = 2.2 × 10-36), followed by relatively 
strong selection at the FAM96A (15q22), MYOF (10q23), 13q21, GRIA2 (4q32), and 
ASAP2 (2p25) loci (PASMC < 1.0 × 10-10). The additional analysis interrogating 
extended haplotypes (integrated haplotype score) showed robust concordance of 
the detected signatures, contributing to fine-mapping of the genes, and provided 
allelic directional insights into selection pressure (e.g., positive selection 
for ADH1B-Arg48His and HLA-DPB1*04:01). The phenome-wide selection enrichment 
analysis with the trait-associated variants identified a variety of the modern 
human phenotypes involved in the adaptation of Japanese. We observed 
population-specific evidence of enrichment with the alcohol-related phenotypes, 
anthropometric and biochemical clinical measurements, and immune-related 
diseases, differently from the findings in Europeans using the UK Biobank 
resource. Our study demonstrated population-specific features of the selection 
signatures in Japanese, highlighting a value of the natural selection study 
using the nation-wide biobank-scale genome and phenotype data.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa005
PMCID: PMC7182208
PMID: 31957793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1366. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1420-1433. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz306.

Polygenic Patterns of Adaptive Introgression in Modern Humans Are Mainly Shaped 
by Response to Pathogens.

Gouy A(1)(2), Excoffier L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ecology and Evolution, University of Berne, Berne 3012, 
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1545-1546.

Anatomically modern humans carry many introgressed variants from other hominins 
in their genomes. Some of them affect their phenotype and can thus be negatively 
or positively selected. Several individual genes have been proposed to be the 
subject of adaptive introgression, but the possibility of polygenic adaptive 
introgression has not been extensively investigated yet. In this study, we 
analyze archaic introgression maps with refined functional enrichment methods to 
find signals of polygenic adaptation of introgressed variants. We first apply a 
method to detect sets of connected genes (subnetworks) within biological 
pathways that present higher-than-expected levels of archaic introgression. We 
then introduce and apply a new statistical test to distinguish between epistatic 
and independent selection in gene sets of present-day humans. We identify 
several known targets of adaptive introgression, and we show that they belong to 
larger networks of introgressed genes. After correction for genetic linkage, we 
find that signals of polygenic adaptation are mostly explained by independent 
and potentially sequential selection episodes. However, we also find some gene 
sets where introgressed variants present significant signals of epistatic 
selection. Our results confirm that archaic introgression has facilitated local 
adaptation, especially in immunity related and metabolic functions and highlight 
its involvement in a coordinated response to pathogens out of Africa.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz306
PMID: 31935281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1367. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1317-1328. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa006.

Genetic Basis of De Novo Appearance of Carotenoid Ornamentation in Bare Parts of 
Canaries.

Gazda MA(1)(2), Toomey MB(3), Araújo PM(1)(4), Lopes RJ(1), Afonso S(1), Myers 
CA(5), Serres K(5), Kiser PD(6), Hill GE(7), Corbo JC(5), Carneiro M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CIBIO/InBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, 
Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal.
(2)Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Biological Science, University of Tulsa, Tulsa, OK.
(4)MARE - Marine and Environmental Sciences Centre, Department of Life Sciences, 
University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(5)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(6)Department of Physiology & Biophysics, School of Medicine, Gillespie 
Neuroscience Research Facility, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL.

Unlike wild and domestic canaries (Serinus canaria), or any of the three dozen 
species of finches in genus Serinus, the domestic urucum breed of canaries 
exhibits bright red bills and legs. This novel trait offers a unique opportunity 
to understand the mechanisms of bare-part coloration in birds. To identify the 
mutation producing the colorful phenotype, we resequenced the genome of urucum 
canaries and performed a range of analyses to search for genotype-to-phenotype 
associations across the genome. We identified a nonsynonymous mutation in the 
gene BCO2 (beta-carotene oxygenase 2, also known as BCDO2), an enzyme involved 
in the cleavage and breakdown of full-length carotenoids into short 
apocarotenoids. Protein structural models and in vitro functional assays 
indicate that the urucum mutation abrogates the carotenoid-cleavage activity of 
BCO2. Consistent with the predicted loss of carotenoid-cleavage activity, urucum 
canaries tended to have increased levels of full-length carotenoid pigments in 
bill tissue and reduced levels of carotenoid-cleavage products (apocarotenoids) 
in retinal tissue compared with other breeds of canaries. We hypothesize that 
carotenoid-based bare-part coloration might be readily gained, modified, or lost 
through simple switches in the enzymatic activity or regulation of BCO2 and this 
gene may be an important mediator in the evolution of bare-part coloration among 
bird species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa006
PMID: 31930402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1368. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1295-1305. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa004.

Disentangling Population History and Character Evolution among Hybridizing 
Lineages.

Mullen SP(1), VanKuren NW(2), Zhang W(3), Nallu S(2), Kristiansen EB(1), Wuyun 
Q(4), Liu K(4), Hill RI(5), Briscoe AD(6), Kronforst MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(3)School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of the Pacific, Stockton, CA.
(6)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of 
California-Irvine, Irvine, CA.

Understanding the origin and maintenance of adaptive phenotypic novelty is a 
central goal of evolutionary biology. However, both hybridization and incomplete 
lineage sorting can lead to genealogical discordance between the regions of the 
genome underlying adaptive traits and the remainder of the genome, decoupling 
inferences about character evolution from population history. Here, to 
disentangle these effects, we investigated the evolutionary origins and 
maintenance of Batesian mimicry between North American admiral butterflies 
(Limenitis arthemis) and their chemically defended model (Battus philenor) using 
a combination of de novo genome sequencing, whole-genome resequencing, and 
statistical introgression mapping. Our results suggest that balancing selection, 
arising from geographic variation in the presence or absence of the unpalatable 
model, has maintained two deeply divergent color patterning haplotypes that have 
been repeatedly sieved among distinct mimetic and nonmimetic lineages of 
Limenitis via introgressive hybridization.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa004
PMCID: PMC8453638
PMID: 31930401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1369. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1272-1294. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa003.

Snake Recombination Landscapes Are Concentrated in Functional Regions despite 
PRDM9.

Schield DR(1), Pasquesi GIM(1), Perry BW(1), Adams RH(1)(2), Nikolakis ZL(1), 
Westfall AK(1), Orton RW(1), Meik JM(3), Mackessy SP(4), Castoe TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX.
(2)Department of Computer & Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Florida 
Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tarleton State University, Stephenville, 
TX.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO.

Meiotic recombination in vertebrates is concentrated in hotspots throughout the 
genome. The location and stability of hotspots have been linked to the presence 
or absence of PRDM9, leading to two primary models for hotspot evolution derived 
from mammals and birds. Species with PRDM9-directed recombination have rapid 
turnover of hotspots concentrated in intergenic regions (i.e., mammals), whereas 
hotspots in species lacking PRDM9 are concentrated in functional regions and 
have greater stability over time (i.e., birds). Snakes possess PRDM9, yet 
virtually nothing is known about snake recombination. Here, we examine the 
recombination landscape and test hypotheses about the roles of PRDM9 in 
rattlesnakes. We find substantial variation in recombination rate within and 
among snake chromosomes, and positive correlations between recombination rate 
and gene density, GC content, and genetic diversity. Like mammals, snakes appear 
to have a functional and active PRDM9, but rather than being directed away from 
genes, snake hotspots are concentrated in promoters and functional regions-a 
pattern previously associated only with species that lack a functional PRDM9. 
Snakes therefore provide a unique example of recombination landscapes in which 
PRDM9 is functional, yet recombination hotspots are associated with functional 
genic regions-a combination of features that defy existing paradigms for 
recombination landscapes in vertebrates. Our findings also provide evidence that 
high recombination rates are a shared feature of vertebrate microchromosomes. 
Our results challenge previous assumptions about the adaptive role of PRDM9 and 
highlight the diversity of recombination landscape features among vertebrate 
lineages.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa003
PMID: 31926008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1370. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1259-1271. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msaa001.

Recent Out-of-Africa Migration of Human Herpes Simplex Viruses.

Forni D(1), Pontremoli C(1), Clerici M(2)(3), Pozzoli U(1), Cagliani R(1), 
Sironi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Institute, IRCCS E. MEDEA, Bioinformatics, Lecco, Italy.
(2)Department of Physiopathology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1544.

Herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 (HSV-1 and HSV-2) are ubiquitous human 
pathogens. Both viruses evolved from simplex viruses infecting African primates 
and they are thus thought to have left Africa during early human migrations. We 
analyzed the population structure of HSV-1 and HSV-2 circulating strains. 
Results indicated that HSV-1 populations have limited geographic structure and 
the most evident clustering by geography is likely due to recent bottlenecks. 
For HSV-2, the only level of population structure is accounted for by the 
so-called "worldwide" and "African" lineages. Analysis of ancestry components 
and nucleotide diversity, however, did not support the view that the worldwide 
lineage followed early humans during out-of-Africa dispersal. Although 
phylogeographic analysis confirmed an African origin for both viruses, molecular 
dating with a method that corrects for the time-dependent rate phenomenon 
indicated that HSV-1 and HSV-2 migrated from Africa in relatively recent times. 
In particular, we estimated that the HSV-2 worldwide lineage left the continent 
in the 18th century, which corresponds to the height of the transatlantic slave 
trade, possibly explaining the high prevalence of HSV-2 in the Americas (second 
highest after Africa). The limited geographic clustering of HSV-1 makes it 
difficult to date its exit from Africa. The split between the basal clade, 
containing mostly African sequences, and all other strains was dated at 
∼5,000 years ago. Our data do not imply that herpes simplex viruses did not 
infect early humans but show that the worldwide distribution of circulating 
strains is the result of relatively recent events.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msaa001
PMID: 31917410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1371. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1462-1469. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz311.

Ancient DNA Evidence from China Reveals the Expansion of Pacific Dogs.

Zhang M(1)(2)(3), Sun G(4), Ren L(5), Yuan H(6), Dong G(7), Zhang L(1), Liu 
F(1), Cao P(1), Ko AM(1), Yang MA(8), Hu S(9), Wang GD(10)(11), Fu Q(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Vertebrate Evolution and Human Origins, Institute of 
Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(2)CAS Center for Excellence in Life and Paleoenvironment, Beijing, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Zhejiang Provincial Institute of Relics and Archaeology, Hangzhou, China.
(5)School of History and Culture, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, China.
(6)National Demonstration Center for Experimental Archaeology Education, 
Department of Archaeology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of Western China's Environmental Systems (Ministry of 
Education), College of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Lanzhou University, 
Lanzhou, China.
(8)Department of Biology, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA.
(9)Shaanxi Academy of Archaeology, Xi'an, China.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute 
of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(11)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

The ancestral homeland of Australian dingoes and Pacific dogs is proposed to be 
in South China. However, the location and timing of their dispersal and 
relationship to dog domestication is unclear. Here, we sequenced 7,000- to 
2,000-year-old complete mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genomes of 27 ancient canids 
(one gray wolf and 26 domestic dogs) from the Yellow River and Yangtze River 
basins (YYRB). These are the first complete ancient mtDNA of Chinese dogs from 
the cradle of early Chinese civilization. We found that most ancient dogs 
(18/26) belong to the haplogroup A1b lineage that is found in high frequency in 
present-day Australian dingoes and precolonial Pacific Island dogs but low 
frequency in present-day China. Particularly, a 7,000-year-old dog from the 
Tianluoshan site in Zhejiang province possesses a haplotype basal to the entire 
haplogroup A1b lineage. We propose that A1b lineage dogs were once widely 
distributed in the YYRB area. Following their dispersal to South China, and then 
into Southeast Asia, New Guinea and remote Oceania, they were largely replaced 
by dogs belonging to other lineages in the last 2,000 years in present-day 
China, especially North China.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz311
PMCID: PMC7182212
PMID: 31913480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1372. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1118-1132. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz297.

Genomic Evidence for Complex Domestication History of the Cultivated Tomato in 
Latin America.

Razifard H(1)(2), Ramos A(3), Della Valle AL(4), Bodary C(5), Goetz E(5), Manser 
EJ(2), Li X(6), Zhang L(3), Visa S(5), Tieman D(6), van der Knaap E(3), Caicedo 
AL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Applied Life Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 
Amherst, MA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA.
(3)Department of Horticulture, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, MA.
(5)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, College of Wooster, Wooster, 
OH.
(6)Department of Horticultural Sciences, Plant Innovation Center, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2020 Apr 20;30(8):R359-R361.

The process of plant domestication is often protracted, involving underexplored 
intermediate stages with important implications for the evolutionary 
trajectories of domestication traits. Previously, tomato domestication history 
has been thought to involve two major transitions: one from wild Solanum 
pimpinellifolium L. to a semidomesticated intermediate, S. lycopersicum L. var. 
cerasiforme (SLC) in South America, and a second transition from SLC to fully 
domesticated S. lycopersicum L. var. lycopersicum in Mesoamerica. In this study, 
we employ population genomic methods to reconstruct tomato domestication 
history, focusing on the evolutionary changes occurring in the intermediate 
stages. Our results suggest that the origin of SLC may predate domestication, 
and that many traits considered typical of cultivated tomatoes arose in South 
American SLC, but were lost or diminished once these partially domesticated 
forms spread northward. These traits were then likely reselected in a convergent 
fashion in the common cultivated tomato, prior to its expansion around the 
world. Based on these findings, we reveal complexities in the intermediate stage 
of tomato domestication and provide insight on trajectories of genes and 
phenotypes involved in tomato domestication syndrome. Our results also allow us 
to identify underexplored germplasm that harbors useful alleles for crop 
improvement.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz297
PMCID: PMC7086179
PMID: 31912142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1373. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1237-1239. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz312.

Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) for macOS.

Stecher G(1), Tamura K(2)(3), Kumar S(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Research Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Tokyo Metropolitan 
University, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Hachioji, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.
(5)Center for Excellence in Genome Medicine and Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

The Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis (MEGA) software enables comparative 
analysis of molecular sequences in phylogenetics and evolutionary medicine. 
Here, we introduce the macOS version of the MEGA software. This new version 
eliminates the need for virtualization and emulation programs previously 
required to use MEGA on Apple computers. MEGA for macOS utilizes memory and 
computing resources efficiently for conducting evolutionary analyses on macOS. 
It has a native Cocoa graphical user interface that is programmed to provide a 
consistent user experience across macOS, Windows, and Linux. MEGA for macOS is 
available from www.megasoftware.net free of charge.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz312
PMCID: PMC7086165
PMID: 31904846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1374. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1452-1461. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz309.

Reduced Translational Efficiency of Eukaryotic Genes after Duplication Events.

Chang AY(1), Liao BY(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, 
Zhunan, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Control of gene expression has been found to be predominantly determined at the 
level of protein translation. However, to date, reduced expression from 
duplicated genes in eukaryotes for dosage maintenance has only been linked to 
transcriptional control involving epigenetic mechanisms. Here, we hypothesize 
that dosage maintenance following gene duplication also involves regulation at 
the protein level. To test this hypothesis, we compared transcriptome and 
proteome data of yeast models, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe, and worm models, Caenorhabditis elegans and Caenorhabditis briggsae, to 
investigate lineage-specifically duplicated genes. Duplicated genes in both 
eukaryotic models exhibited a reduced protein-to-mRNA abundance ratio. Moreover, 
dosage sensitive genes, represented by genes encoding protein complex subunits, 
reduced their protein-to-mRNA abundance ratios more significantly than the other 
genes after duplication events. An analysis of ribosome profiling (Ribo-Seq) 
data further showed that reduced translational efficiency was more prominent for 
dosage sensitive genes than for the other genes. Meanwhile, no difference in 
protein degradation rate was associated with duplication events. Translationally 
repressed duplicated genes were also more likely to be inhibited at the level of 
transcription. Taken together, these results suggest that translation-mediated 
dosage control is partially contributed by natural selection and it enhances 
transcriptional control in maintaining gene dosage after gene duplication events 
during eukaryotic genome evolution.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz309
PMID: 31904835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1375. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1508-1529. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz310.

Insights from Empirical Analyses and Simulations on Using Multiple Fossil 
Calibrations with Relaxed Clocks to Estimate Divergence Times.

Carruthers T(1), Scotland RW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Relaxed clock methods account for among-branch-rate-variation when estimating 
divergence times by inferring different rates for individual branches. In order 
to infer different rates for individual branches, important assumptions are 
required. This is because molecular sequence data do not provide direct 
information about rates but instead provide direct information about the total 
number of substitutions along any branch, which is a product of the rate and 
time for that branch. Often, the assumptions required for estimating rates for 
individual branches depend heavily on the implementation of multiple fossil 
calibrations in a single phylogeny. Here, we show that the basis of these 
assumptions is often critically undermined. First, we highlight that the 
temporal distribution of the fossil record often violates key assumptions of 
methods that use multiple fossil calibrations with relaxed clocks. With respect 
to "node calibration" methods, this conclusion is based on our inference that 
different fossil calibrations are unlikely to reflect the relative ages of 
different clades. With respect to the fossilized birth-death process, this 
conclusion is based on our inference that the fossil recovery rate is often 
highly heterogeneous. We then demonstrate that methods of divergence time 
estimation that use multiple fossil calibrations are highly sensitive to 
assumptions about the fossil record and among-branch-rate-variation. Given the 
problems associated with these assumptions, our results highlight that using 
multiple fossil calibrations with relaxed clocks often does little to improve 
the accuracy of divergence time estimates.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz310
PMID: 31899514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1376. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1434-1451. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz308.

Origin and Evolution of Carboxysome Positioning Systems in Cyanobacteria.

MacCready JS(1), Basalla JL(1), Vecchiarelli AG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Carboxysomes are protein-based organelles that are essential for allowing 
cyanobacteria to fix CO2. Previously, we identified a two-component system, 
McdAB, responsible for equidistantly positioning carboxysomes in the model 
cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 (MacCready JS, Hakim P, Young 
EJ, Hu L, Liu J, Osteryoung KW, Vecchiarelli AG, Ducat DC. 2018. Protein 
gradients on the nucleoid position the carbon-fixing organelles of 
cyanobacteria. eLife 7:pii:e39723). McdA, a ParA-type ATPase, nonspecifically 
binds the nucleoid in the presence of ATP. McdB, a novel factor that directly 
binds carboxysomes, displaces McdA from the nucleoid. Removal of McdA from the 
nucleoid in the vicinity of carboxysomes by McdB causes a global break in McdA 
symmetry, and carboxysome motion occurs via a Brownian-ratchet-based mechanism 
toward the highest concentration of McdA. Despite the importance for 
cyanobacteria to properly position their carboxysomes, whether the McdAB system 
is widespread among cyanobacteria remains an open question. Here, we show that 
the McdAB system is widespread among β-cyanobacteria, often clustering with 
carboxysome-related components, and is absent in α-cyanobacteria. Moreover, we 
show that two distinct McdAB systems exist in β-cyanobacteria, with Type 2 
systems being the most ancestral and abundant, and Type 1 systems, like that of 
S. elongatus, possibly being acquired more recently. Lastly, all McdB proteins 
share the sequence signatures of a protein capable of undergoing liquid-liquid 
phase separation. Indeed, we find that representatives of both McdB types 
undergo liquid-liquid phase separation in vitro, the first example of a 
ParA-type ATPase partner protein to exhibit this behavior. Our results have 
broader implications for understanding carboxysome evolution, biogenesis, 
homeostasis, and positioning in cyanobacteria.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz308
PMCID: PMC7182216
PMID: 31899489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1377. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):306. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz247.

Improved Mapping of Swedish Genes.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):18-30.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz247
PMID: 31880781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1378. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):305-306. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz246.

Scientists Identify Rare Evolutionary Intermediates That Help to Understand the 
Origin of Eukaryotes.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):124-133.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz246
PMID: 31880779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1379. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):304. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz245.

Genomic Fluke: Whole-Genome Comparative Analyses of Liver and Intestinal 
Parasites Reveal Evolutionary History and Shift in Organs, Animals of Choice.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):84-99.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz245
PMID: 31880770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1380. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1133-1147. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz298.

Enzyme Evolution: An Epistatic Ratchet versus a Smooth Reversible Transition.

Ben-David M(1), Soskine M(1), Dubovetskyi A(1), Cherukuri KP(1), Dym O(2), 
Sussman JL(3), Liao Q(4), Szeler K(4), Kamerlin SCL(4), Tawfik DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(2)Department of Life Sciences Core Facilities, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.
(3)Department of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.
(4)Department of Chemistry - BMC, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Evolutionary trajectories are deemed largely irreversible. In a newly diverged 
protein, reversion of mutations that led to the functional switch typically 
results in loss of both the new and the ancestral functions. Nonetheless, 
evolutionary transitions where reversions are viable have also been described. 
The structural and mechanistic causes of reversion compatibility versus 
incompatibility therefore remain unclear. We examined two laboratory evolution 
trajectories of mammalian paraoxonase-1, a lactonase with promiscuous 
organophosphate hydrolase (OPH) activity. Both trajectories began with the same 
active-site mutant, His115Trp, which lost the native lactonase activity and 
acquired higher OPH activity. A neo-functionalization trajectory amplified the 
promiscuous OPH activity, whereas the re-functionalization trajectory restored 
the native activity, thus generating a new lactonase that lacks His115. The 
His115 revertants of these trajectories indicated opposite trends. Revertants of 
the neo-functionalization trajectory lost both the evolved OPH and the original 
lactonase activity. Revertants of the trajectory that restored the original 
lactonase function were, however, fully active. Crystal structures and molecular 
simulations show that in the newly diverged OPH, the reverted His115 and other 
catalytic residues are displaced, thus causing loss of both the original and the 
new activity. In contrast, in the re-functionalization trajectory, reversion 
compatibility of the original lactonase activity derives from mechanistic 
versatility whereby multiple residues can fulfill the same task. This 
versatility enables unique sequence-reversible compositions that are 
inaccessible when the active site was repurposed toward a new function.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz298
PMID: 31873734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1381. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1495-1507. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz307.

Deep Residual Neural Networks Resolve Quartet Molecular Phylogenies.

Zou Z(1), Zhang H(2), Guan Y(2)(3), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(2)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Phylogenetic inference is of fundamental importance to evolutionary as well as 
other fields of biology, and molecular sequences have emerged as the primary 
data for this task. Although many phylogenetic methods have been developed to 
explicitly take into account substitution models of sequence evolution, such 
methods could fail due to model misspecification or insufficiency, especially in 
the face of heterogeneities in substitution processes across sites and among 
lineages. In this study, we propose to infer topologies of four-taxon trees 
using deep residual neural networks, a machine learning approach needing no 
explicit modeling of the subject system and having a record of success in 
solving complex nonlinear inference problems. We train residual networks on 
simulated protein sequence data with extensive amino acid substitution 
heterogeneities. We show that the well-trained residual network predictors can 
outperform existing state-of-the-art inference methods such as the maximum 
likelihood method on diverse simulated test data, especially under extensive 
substitution heterogeneities. Reassuringly, residual network predictors 
generally agree with existing methods in the trees inferred from real 
phylogenetic data with known or widely believed topologies. Furthermore, when 
combined with the quartet puzzling algorithm, residual network predictors can be 
used to reconstruct trees with more than four taxa. We conclude that deep 
learning represents a powerful new approach to phylogenetic reconstruction, 
especially when sequences evolve via heterogeneous substitution processes. We 
present our best trained predictor in a freely available program named 
Phylogenetics by Deep Learning (PhyDL, https://gitlab.com/ztzou/phydl; last 
accessed January 3, 2020).

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz307
PMCID: PMC8453599
PMID: 31868908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1382. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1407-1419. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz304.

Parallel Seed Color Adaptation during Multiple Domestication Attempts of an 
Ancient New World Grain.

Stetter MG(1)(2), Vidal-Villarejo M(2), Schmid KJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Botanical Institute, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Department of Plant Breeding, Population Genetics and Seed Science, 
University of Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany.

Thousands of plants have been selected as crops; yet, only a few are fully 
domesticated. The lack of adaptation to agroecological environments of many crop 
plants with few characteristic domestication traits potentially has genetic 
causes. Here, we investigate the incomplete domestication of an ancient grain 
from the Americas, amaranth. Although three grain amaranth species have been 
cultivated as crop for millennia, all three lack key domestication traits. We 
sequenced 121 crop and wild individuals to investigate the genomic signature of 
repeated incomplete adaptation. Our analysis shows that grain amaranth has been 
domesticated three times from a single wild ancestor. One trait that has been 
selected during domestication in all three grain species is the seed color, 
which changed from dark seeds to white seeds. We were able to map the genetic 
control of the seed color adaptation to two genomic regions on chromosomes 3 and 
9, employing three independent mapping populations. Within the locus on 
chromosome 9, we identify an MYB-like transcription factor gene, a known 
regulator for seed color variation in other plant species. We identify a soft 
selective sweep in this genomic region in one of the crop species but not in the 
other two species. The demographic analysis of wild and domesticated amaranths 
revealed a population bottleneck predating the domestication of grain amaranth. 
Our results indicate that a reduced level of ancestral genetic variation did not 
prevent the selection of traits with a simple genetic architecture but may have 
limited the adaptation of complex domestication traits.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz304
PMID: 31860092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1383. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1480-1494. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz305.

Probabilities of Unranked and Ranked Anomaly Zones under Birth-Death Models.

Kim A(1), Rosenberg NA(2), Degnan JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Mexico, 
Albuquerque, NM.
(2)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.

A labeled gene tree topology that is more probable than the labeled gene tree 
topology matching a species tree is called "anomalous." Species trees that can 
generate such anomalous gene trees are said to be in the "anomaly zone." Here, 
probabilities of "unranked" and "ranked" gene tree topologies under the 
multispecies coalescent are considered. A ranked tree depicts not only the 
topological relationship among gene lineages, as an unranked tree does, but also 
the sequence in which the lineages coalesce. In this article, we study how the 
parameters of a species tree simulated under a constant-rate birth-death process 
can affect the probability that the species tree lies in the anomaly zone. We 
find that with more than five taxa, it is possible for species trees to have 
both anomalous unranked and ranked gene trees. The probability of being in 
either type of anomaly zone increases with more taxa. The probability of 
anomalous gene trees also increases with higher speciation rates. We observe 
that the probabilities of unranked anomaly zones are higher and grow much faster 
than those of ranked anomaly zones as the speciation rate increases. Our 
simulation shows that the most probable ranked gene tree is likely to have the 
same unranked topology as the species tree. We design the software PRANC, which 
computes probabilities of ranked gene tree topologies given a species tree under 
the coalescent model.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz305
PMCID: PMC7182218
PMID: 31860090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1384. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):1. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz285.

MBE Emerging Classics 2020.

Kumar S(1), Rowe H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz285
PMID: 31851338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1385. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1394-1406. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz303.

Using Selection by Nonantibiotic Stressors to Sensitize Bacteria to Antibiotics.

Maltas J(1), Krasnick B(1), Wood KB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Evolutionary adaptation of bacteria to nonantibiotic selective forces, such as 
osmotic stress, has been previously associated with increased antibiotic 
resistance, but much less is known about potentially sensitizing effects of 
nonantibiotic stressors. In this study, we use laboratory evolution to 
investigate adaptation of Enterococcus faecalis, an opportunistic bacterial 
pathogen, to a broad collection of environmental agents, ranging from 
antibiotics and biocides to extreme pH and osmotic stress. We find that 
nonantibiotic selection frequently leads to increased sensitivity to other 
conditions, including multiple antibiotics. Using population sequencing and 
whole-genome sequencing of single isolates from the evolved populations, we 
identify multiple mutations in genes previously linked with resistance to the 
selecting conditions, including genes corresponding to known drug targets or 
multidrug efflux systems previously tied to collateral sensitivity. Finally, we 
hypothesized based on the measured sensitivity profiles that sequential rounds 
of antibiotic and nonantibiotic selection may lead to hypersensitive populations 
by harnessing the orthogonal collateral effects of particular pairs of selective 
forces. To test this hypothesis, we show experimentally that populations evolved 
to a sequence of linezolid (an oxazolidinone antibiotic) and sodium benzoate (a 
common preservative) exhibit increased sensitivity to more stressors than 
adaptation to either condition alone. The results demonstrate how sequential 
adaptation to drug and nondrug environments can be used to sensitize bacteria to 
antibiotics and highlight new potential strategies for exploiting shared 
constraints governing adaptation to diverse environmental challenges.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz303
PMCID: PMC7182213
PMID: 31851309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1386. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):994-1006. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz282.

Population History and Gene Divergence in Native Mexicans Inferred from 76 Human 
Exomes.

Ávila-Arcos MC(1)(2), McManus KF(3)(4), Sandoval K(5), Rodríguez-Rodríguez 
JE(5), Villa-Islas V(1), Martin AR(2), Luisi P(6)(7), Peñaloza-Espinosa RI(8), 
Eng C(9), Huntsman S(9), Burchard EG(9), Gignoux CR(10), Bustamante CD(2), 
Moreno-Estrada A(5).

Author information:
(1)International Laboratory for Human Genome Research (LIIGH), UNAM Juriquilla, 
Queretaro, Mexico.
(2)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(3)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA.
(5)National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity (LANGEBIO), UGA, CINVESTAV, 
Irapuato, Guanajuato 36821, Mexico.
(6)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Inmunología y Enfermedades 
Infecciosas, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, 
Córdoba, Argentina.
(7)Facultad de Filosofía y Humanidades, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, 
Córdoba, Argentina.
(8)Division of Biological and Health Sciences, Department of Biological Systems, 
Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Xochimilco, Mexico City, Mexico.
(9)Department Bioengineering & Therapeutic Sciences and Medicine, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(10)Division of Biomedical Informatics and Personalized Medicine, University of 
Colorado, Denver, CO.

Native American genetic variation remains underrepresented in most catalogs of 
human genome sequencing data. Previous genotyping efforts have revealed that 
Mexico's Indigenous population is highly differentiated and substructured, thus 
potentially harboring higher proportions of private genetic variants of 
functional and biomedical relevance. Here we have targeted the coding fraction 
of the genome and characterized its full site frequency spectrum by sequencing 
76 exomes from five Indigenous populations across Mexico. Using diffusion 
approximations, we modeled the demographic history of Indigenous populations 
from Mexico with northern and southern ethnic groups splitting 7.2 KYA and 
subsequently diverging locally 6.5 and 5.7 KYA, respectively. Selection scans 
for positive selection revealed BCL2L13 and KBTBD8 genes as potential candidates 
for adaptive evolution in Rarámuris and Triquis, respectively. BCL2L13 is highly 
expressed in skeletal muscle and could be related to physical endurance, a 
well-known phenotype of the northern Mexico Rarámuri. The KBTBD8 gene has been 
associated with idiopathic short stature and we found it to be highly 
differentiated in Triqui, a southern Indigenous group from Oaxaca whose height 
is extremely low compared to other Native populations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz282
PMCID: PMC7086176
PMID: 31848607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1387. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):933-939. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz284.

Estimating Pangenomes with Roary.

Sitto F(1), Battistuzzi FU(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Oakland University, Rochester, MI.
(2)Center for Data Science and Big Data Analytics, Oakland University, 
Rochester, MI.

A description of the genetic makeup of a species based on a single genome is 
often insufficient because it ignores the variability in gene repertoire among 
multiple strains. The estimation of the pangenome of a species is a solution to 
this issue as it provides an overview of genes that are shared by all strains 
and genes that are present in only some of the genomes. These different sets of 
genes can then be analyzed functionally to explore correlations with unique 
phenotypes and adaptations. This protocol presents the usage of Roary, a 
Linux-native pangenome application. Roary is a straightforward software that 
provides 1) an overview about core and accessory genes for those interested in 
general trends and, also, 2) detailed information on gene presence/absence in 
each genome for in-depth analyses. Results are provided both in text and graphic 
format.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz284
PMCID: PMC7038658
PMID: 31848603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1388. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):952-968. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz301.

Genomic Mechanisms of Physiological and Morphological Adaptations of Limestone 
Langurs to Karst Habitats.

Liu Z(1)(2), Zhang L(1)(3), Yan Z(1)(2), Ren Z(4), Han F(5), Tan X(1)(3), Xiang 
Z(1)(3), Dong F(1)(2), Yang Z(1)(6), Liu G(1), Wang Z(1)(3), Zhang J(1), Que 
T(7), Tang C(8), Li Y(8), Wang S(9), Wu J(9), Li L(4), Huang C(1), Roos C(10), 
Li M(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Animal Ecology and Conservation Biology, Institute of 
Zoology, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)Institute of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, 
Hefei 230601, China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China.
(5)Biomarker Technologies Corporation, Beijing 101300, China.
(6)School of Life Sciences, Qufu Normal University, Qufu 273165, Shandong, 
China.
(7)Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region Terrestrial Wildlife Medical-Aid Monitoring 
Epidemic Diseases Research Center, Nanning 530001, Guangxi Province, China.
(8)Wuzhou Langur Breeding and Research Center, Wuzhou 543002, Guangxi Province, 
China.
(9)Nanning Zoo, Nanning 530000, Guangxi Province, China.
(10)Gene Bank of Primates and Primate Genetics Laboratory, German Primate 
Center, Leibniz Institute for Primate Research, Göttingen 37077, Germany.
(11)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming 650223, China.

Knowledge of the physiological and morphological evolution and adaptation of 
nonhuman primates is critical to understand hominin origins, physiological 
ecology, morphological evolution, and applications in biomedicine. Particularly, 
limestone langurs represent a direct example of adaptations to the challenges of 
exploiting a high calcium and harsh environment. Here, we report a de novo 
genome assembly (Tfra_2.0) of a male François's langur (Trachypithecus 
francoisi) with contig N50 of 16.3 Mb and resequencing data of 23 individuals 
representing five limestone and four forest langur species. Comparative genomics 
reveals evidence for functional evolution in genes and gene families related to 
calcium signaling in the limestone langur genome, probably as an adaptation to 
naturally occurring high calcium levels present in water and plant resources in 
karst habitats. The genomic and functional analyses suggest that a single point 
mutation (Lys1905Arg) in the α1c subunit of the L-type voltage-gated calcium 
channel Cav1.2 (CACNA1C) attenuates the inward calcium current into the cells in 
vitro. Population genomic analyses and RNA-sequencing indicate that EDNRB is 
less expressed in white tail hair follicles of the white-headed langur 
(T. leucocephalus) compared with the black-colored François's langur and hence 
might be responsible for species-specific differences in body coloration. Our 
findings contribute to a new understanding of gene-environment interactions and 
physiomorphological adaptative mechanisms in ecologically specialized primate 
taxa.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz301
PMID: 31846031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1389. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):610. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz278.

Erratum to: Epimutations in Developmental Genes Underlie the Onset of 
Domestication in Farmed European Sea Bass.

Anastasiadi D, Piferrer F.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2252-2264.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz278
PMCID: PMC6993845
PMID: 31845995


1390. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1470-1479. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz302.

Horizontal Gene Transfer Phylogenetics: A Random Walk Approach.

Sevillya G(1), Doerr D(2), Lerner Y(1), Stoye J(2), Steel M(3), Snir S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Faculty of Technology, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany.
(3)School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, 
New Zealand.

The dramatic decrease in time and cost for generating genetic sequence data has 
opened up vast opportunities in molecular systematics, one of which is the 
ability to decipher the evolutionary history of strains of a species. Under this 
fine systematic resolution, the standard markers are too crude to provide a 
phylogenetic signal. Nevertheless, among prokaryotes, genome dynamics in the 
form of horizontal gene transfer (HGT) between organisms and gene loss seem to 
provide far richer information by affecting both gene order and gene content. 
The "synteny index" (SI) between a pair of genomes combines these latter two 
factors, allowing comparison of genomes with unequal gene content, together with 
order considerations of their common genes. Although this approach is useful for 
classifying close relatives, no rigorous statistical modeling for it has been 
suggested. Such modeling is valuable, as it allows observed measures to be 
transformed into estimates of time periods during evolution, yielding the 
"additivity" of the measure. To the best of our knowledge, there is no other 
additivity proof for other gene order/content measures under HGT. Here, we 
provide a first statistical model and analysis for the SI measure. We model the 
"gene neighborhood" as a "birth-death-immigration" process affected by the HGT 
activity over the genome, and analytically relate the HGT rate and time to the 
expected SI. This model is asymptotic and thus provides accurate results, 
assuming infinite size genomes. Therefore, we also developed a heuristic model 
following an "exponential decay" function, accounting for biologically realistic 
values, which performed well in simulations. Applying this model to 1,133 
prokaryotes partitioned to 39 clusters by the rank of genus yields that the 
average number of genome dynamics events per gene in the phylogenetic depth of 
genus is around half with significant variability between genera. This result 
extends and confirms similar results obtained for individual genera in different 
manners.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz302
PMID: 31845962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1391. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1165-1178. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz300.

Enhancers Facilitate the Birth of De Novo Genes and Gene Integration into 
Regulatory Networks.

Majic P(1)(2), Payne JL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Regulatory networks control the spatiotemporal gene expression patterns that 
give rise to and define the individual cell types of multicellular organisms. In 
eumetazoa, distal regulatory elements called enhancers play a key role in 
determining the structure of such networks, particularly the wiring diagram of 
"who regulates whom." Mutations that affect enhancer activity can therefore 
rewire regulatory networks, potentially causing adaptive changes in gene 
expression. Here, we use whole-tissue and single-cell transcriptomic and 
chromatin accessibility data from mouse to show that enhancers play an 
additional role in the evolution of regulatory networks: They facilitate network 
growth by creating transcriptionally active regions of open chromatin that are 
conducive to de novo gene evolution. Specifically, our comparative 
transcriptomic analysis with three other mammalian species shows that young, 
mouse-specific intergenic open reading frames are preferentially located near 
enhancers, whereas older open reading frames are not. Mouse-specific intergenic 
open reading frames that are proximal to enhancers are more highly and stably 
transcribed than those that are not proximal to enhancers or promoters, and they 
are transcribed in a limited diversity of cellular contexts. Furthermore, we 
report several instances of mouse-specific intergenic open reading frames 
proximal to promoters showing evidence of being repurposed enhancers. We also 
show that open reading frames gradually acquire interactions with enhancers over 
macroevolutionary timescales, helping integrate genes-those that have arisen de 
novo or by other means-into existing regulatory networks. Taken together, our 
results highlight a dual role of enhancers in expanding and rewiring gene 
regulatory networks.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz300
PMCID: PMC7086177
PMID: 31845961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1392. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1148-1164. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz299.

A Depletion of Stop Codons in lincRNA is Owing to Transfer of Selective 
Constraint from Coding Sequences.

Abrahams L(1), Hurst LD(1).

Author information:
(1)Milner Centre for Evolution, Department of Biology and Biochemistry, 
University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.

Although the constraints on a gene's sequence are often assumed to reflect the 
functioning of that gene, here we propose transfer selection, a constraint 
operating on one class of genes transferred to another, mediated by shared 
binding factors. We show that such transfer can explain an otherwise paradoxical 
depletion of stop codons in long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs). 
Serine/arginine-rich proteins direct the splicing machinery by binding exonic 
splice enhancers (ESEs) in immature mRNA. As coding exons cannot contain stop 
codons in one reading frame, stop codons should be rare within ESEs. We confirm 
that the stop codon density (SCD) in ESE motifs is low, even accounting for 
nucleotide biases. Given that serine/arginine-rich proteins binding ESEs also 
facilitate lincRNA splicing, a low SCD could transfer to lincRNAs. As predicted, 
multiexon lincRNA exons are depleted in stop codons, a result not explained by 
open reading frame (ORF) contamination. Consistent with transfer selection, stop 
codon depletion in lincRNAs is most acute in exonic regions with the highest ESE 
density, disappears when ESEs are masked, is consistent with stop codon usage 
skews in ESEs, and is diminished in both single-exon lincRNAs and introns. Owing 
to low SCD, the maximum lengths of pseudo-ORFs frequently exceed null 
expectations. This has implications for ORF annotation and the evolution of de 
novo protein-coding genes from lincRNAs. We conclude that not all constraints 
operating on genes need be explained by the functioning of the gene but may 
instead be transferred owing to shared binding factors.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz299
PMCID: PMC7086181
PMID: 31841162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1393. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1211-1223. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz296.

A Bayesian Implementation of the Multispecies Coalescent Model with 
Introgression for Phylogenomic Analysis.

Flouri T(1), Jiao X(1), Rannala B(2), Yang Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
CA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2022 Nov 3;39(11):

Recent analyses suggest that cross-species gene flow or introgression is common 
in nature, especially during species divergences. Genomic sequence data can be 
used to infer introgression events and to estimate the timing and intensity of 
introgression, providing an important means to advance our understanding of the 
role of gene flow in speciation. Here, we implement the 
multispecies-coalescent-with-introgression model, an extension of the 
multispecies-coalescent model to incorporate introgression, in our Bayesian 
Markov chain Monte Carlo program Bpp. The 
multispecies-coalescent-with-introgression model accommodates deep coalescence 
(or incomplete lineage sorting) and introgression and provides a natural 
framework for inference using genomic sequence data. Computer simulation 
confirms the good statistical properties of the method, although hundreds or 
thousands of loci are typically needed to estimate introgression probabilities 
reliably. Reanalysis of data sets from the purple cone spruce confirms the 
hypothesis of homoploid hybrid speciation. We estimated the introgression 
probability using the genomic sequence data from six mosquito species in the 
Anopheles gambiae species complex, which varies considerably across the genome, 
likely driven by differential selection against introgressed alleles.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz296
PMCID: PMC7086182
PMID: 31825513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1394. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1202-1210. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz291.

Linking Branch Lengths across Sets of Loci Provides the Highest Statistical 
Support for Phylogenetic Inference.

Duchêne DA(1)(2), Tong KJ(2), Foster CSP(2), Duchêne S(3), Lanfear R(1), Ho 
SYW(2).

Author information:
(1)Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(2)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for 
Infection and Immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Evolution leaves heterogeneous patterns of nucleotide variation across the 
genome, with different loci subject to varying degrees of mutation, selection, 
and drift. In phylogenetics, the potential impacts of partitioning sequence data 
for the assignment of substitution models are well appreciated. In contrast, the 
treatment of branch lengths has received far less attention. In this study, we 
examined the effects of linking and unlinking branch-length parameters across 
loci or subsets of loci. By analyzing a range of empirical data sets, we find 
consistent support for a model in which branch lengths are proportionate between 
subsets of loci: gene trees share the same pattern of branch lengths, but form 
subsets that vary in their overall tree lengths. These models had substantially 
better statistical support than models that assume identical branch lengths 
across gene trees, or those in which genes form subsets with distinct 
branch-length patterns. We show using simulations and empirical data that the 
complexity of the branch-length model with the highest support depends on the 
length of the sequence alignment and on the numbers of taxa and loci in the data 
set. Our findings suggest that models in which branch lengths are proportionate 
between subsets have the highest statistical support under the conditions that 
are most commonly seen in practice. The results of our study have implications 
for model selection, computational efficiency, and experimental design in 
phylogenomics.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz291
PMID: 31825512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1395. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):982-993. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz279.

Convergent Evolution of Cysteine-Rich Keratins in Hard Skin Appendages of 
Terrestrial Vertebrates.

Ehrlich F(1), Lachner J(1), Hermann M(2), Tschachler E(1), Eckhart L(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Division of Biology and Pathobiology of the Skin, Department of 
Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.

Terrestrial vertebrates have evolved hard skin appendages, such as scales, 
claws, feathers, and hair that play crucial roles in defense, predation, 
locomotion, and thermal insulation. The mechanical properties of these skin 
appendages are largely determined by cornified epithelial components. So-called 
"hair keratins," cysteine-rich intermediate filament proteins that undergo 
covalent cross-linking via disulfide bonds, are the crucial structural proteins 
of hair and claws in mammals and hair keratin orthologs are also present in 
lizard claws, indicating an evolutionary origin in a hairless common ancestor of 
amniotes. Here, we show that reptiles and birds have also other cysteine-rich 
keratins which lack cysteine-rich orthologs in mammals. In addition to hard 
acidic (type I) sauropsid-specific (HAS) keratins, we identified hard basic 
(type II) sauropsid-specific (HBS) keratins which are conserved in lepidosaurs, 
turtles, crocodilians, and birds. Immunohistochemical analysis with a newly made 
antibody revealed expression of chicken HBS1 keratin in the cornifying 
epithelial cells of feathers. Molecular phylogenetics suggested that the high 
cysteine contents of HAS and HBS keratins evolved independently from the 
cysteine-rich sequences of hair keratin orthologs, thus representing products of 
convergent evolution. In conclusion, we propose an evolutionary model in which 
HAS and HBS keratins evolved as structural proteins in epithelial cornification 
of reptiles and at least one HBS keratin was co-opted as a component of feathers 
after the evolutionary divergence of birds from reptiles. Thus, cytoskeletal 
proteins of hair and feathers are products of convergent evolution and 
evolutionary co-option to similar biomechanical functions in clade-specific hard 
skin appendages.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz279
PMCID: PMC7086170
PMID: 31822906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1396. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1070-1089. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz290.

Distinct Evolutionary Trajectories of Neuronal and Hair Cell Nicotinic 
Acetylcholine Receptors.

Marcovich I(1), Moglie MJ(1), Carpaneto Freixas AE(1), Trigila AP(1), Franchini 
LF(1), Plazas PV(2), Lipovsek M(1)(3), Elgoyhen AB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular "Dr. 
Héctor N. Torres" (INGEBI), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Guy's Campus, London, United Kingdom.

The expansion and pruning of ion channel families has played a crucial role in 
the evolution of nervous systems. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are 
ligand-gated ion channels with distinct roles in synaptic transmission at the 
neuromuscular junction, the central and peripheral nervous system, and the inner 
ear. Remarkably, the complement of nAChR subunits has been highly conserved 
along vertebrate phylogeny. To ask whether the different subtypes of receptors 
underwent different evolutionary trajectories, we performed a comprehensive 
analysis of vertebrate nAChRs coding sequences, mouse single-cell expression 
patterns, and comparative functional properties of receptors from three 
representative tetrapod species. We found significant differences between hair 
cell and neuronal receptors that were most likely shaped by the differences in 
coexpression patterns and coassembly rules of component subunits. Thus, neuronal 
nAChRs showed high degree of coding sequence conservation, coupled to greater 
coexpression variance and conservation of functional properties across tetrapod 
clades. In contrast, hair cell α9α10 nAChRs exhibited greater sequence 
divergence, narrow coexpression pattern, and great variability of functional 
properties across species. These results point to differential substrates for 
random change within the family of gene paralogs that relate to the segregated 
roles of nAChRs in synaptic transmission.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz290
PMCID: PMC7086180
PMID: 31821508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1397. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1100-1113. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz294.

Ancestral Hybridization Facilitated Species Diversification in the Lake Malawi 
Cichlid Fish Adaptive Radiation.

Svardal H(1)(2)(3)(4), Quah FX(3), Malinsky M(5), Ngatunga BP(6), Miska 
EA(2)(3)(7), Salzburger W(5), Genner MJ(8), Turner GF(9), Durbin R(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(3)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(4)Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Zoological Institute, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(6)Tanzania Fisheries Research Institute, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(7)Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(8)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
(9)School of Biological Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, United Kingdom.

The adaptive radiation of cichlid fishes in East African Lake Malawi encompasses 
over 500 species that are believed to have evolved within the last 800,000 years 
from a common founder population. It has been proposed that hybridization 
between ancestral lineages can provide the genetic raw material to fuel such 
exceptionally high diversification rates, and evidence for this has recently 
been presented for the Lake Victoria region cichlid superflock. Here, we report 
that Lake Malawi cichlid genomes also show evidence of hybridization between two 
lineages that split 3-4 Ma, today represented by Lake Victoria cichlids and the 
riverine Astatotilapia sp. "ruaha blue." The two ancestries in Malawi cichlid 
genomes are present in large blocks of several kilobases, but there is little 
variation in this pattern between Malawi cichlid species, suggesting that the 
large-scale mosaic structure of the genomes was largely established prior to the 
radiation. Nevertheless, tens of thousands of polymorphic variants apparently 
derived from the hybridization are interspersed in the genomes. These loci show 
a striking excess of differentiation across ecological subgroups in the Lake 
Malawi cichlid assemblage, and parental alleles sort differentially into benthic 
and pelagic Malawi cichlid lineages, consistent with strong differential 
selection on these loci during species divergence. Furthermore, these loci are 
enriched for genes involved in immune response and vision, including opsin genes 
previously identified as important for speciation. Our results reinforce the 
role of ancestral hybridization in explosive diversification by demonstrating 
its significance in one of the largest recent vertebrate adaptive radiations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz294
PMCID: PMC7086168
PMID: 31821500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1398. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1114-1117. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz295.

Sexual Selection Shapes Seminal Vesicle Secretion Gene Expression in House Mice.

Simmons LW(1), Sloan NS(1), Firman RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Evolutionary Biology, School of Biological Sciences, The 
University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia.

Reproductive proteins typically have high rates of molecular evolution, and are 
assumed to be under positive selection from sperm competition and cryptic female 
choice. However, ascribing evolutionary divergence in the genome to these 
processes of sexual selection from patterns of association alone is problematic. 
Here, we use an experimental manipulation of postmating sexual selection acting 
on populations of house mice and explore its consequences for the expression of 
seminal vesicle secreted (SVS) proteins. Following 25 generations of selection, 
males from populations subjected to postmating sexual selection had evolved 
increased expression of at least two SVS genes that exhibit the signature of 
positive selection at the molecular level, SVS1 and SVS2. These proteins 
contribute to mating plug formation and sperm survival in the female 
reproductive tract. Our data thereby support the view that sexual selection is 
responsible for the evolution of these seminal fluid proteins.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz295
PMID: 31821497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1399. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1041-1055. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz288.

Human Genomic Diversity Where the Mediterranean Joins the Atlantic.

Hernández CL(1), Pita G(2), Cavadas B(3)(4), López S(5), Sánchez-Martínez LJ(1), 
Dugoujon JM(6), Novelletto A(7), Cuesta P(8), Pereira L(3)(4), Calderón R(1).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biodiversidad, Ecología y Evolución, Facultad de Biología, 
Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Human Genotyping Unit-CeGen, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), 
Madrid, Spain.
(3)i3S, Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(4)IPATIMUP-Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular, Universidade do 
Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(5)UCL Cancer Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(6)CNRS UMR 5288 Laboratoire d'Anthropologie Moléculaire et d'Imagerie de 
Synthèse (AMIS), Université Paul Sabatier Toulouse III, Toulouse, France.
(7)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(8)Centro de Proceso de Datos, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain.

Throughout the past few years, a lively debate emerged about the timing and 
magnitude of the human migrations between the Iberian Peninsula and the Maghreb. 
Several pieces of evidence, including archaeological, anthropological, 
historical, and genetic data, have pointed to a complex and intermingled 
evolutionary history in the western Mediterranean area. To study to what extent 
connections across the Strait of Gibraltar and surrounding areas have shaped the 
present-day genomic diversity of its populations, we have performed a screening 
of 2.5 million single-nucleotide polymorphisms in 142 samples from southern 
Spain, southern Portugal, and Morocco. We built comprehensive data sets of the 
studied area and we implemented multistep bioinformatic approaches to assess 
population structure, demographic histories, and admixture dynamics. Both local 
and global ancestry inference showed an internal substructure in the Iberian 
Peninsula, mainly linked to a differential African ancestry. Western Iberia, 
from southern Portugal to Galicia, constituted an independent cluster within 
Iberia characterized by an enriched African genomic input. Migration time 
modeling showed recent historic dates for the admixture events occurring both in 
Iberia and in the North of Africa. However, an integrative vision of both 
paleogenomic and modern DNA data allowed us to detect chronological transitions 
and population turnovers that could be the result of transcontinental migrations 
dating back from Neolithic times. The present contribution aimed to fill the 
gaps in the modern human genomic record of a key geographic area, where the 
Mediterranean and the Atlantic come together.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz288
PMCID: PMC7086172
PMID: 31816048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1400. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1020-1040. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz287.

Paralogization and New Protein Architectures in Planctomycetes Bacteria with 
Complex Cell Structures.

Mahajan M(1), Yee B(1), Hägglund E(1), Guy L(1)(2), Fuerst JA(3), Andersson 
SGE(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Evolution, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Science for 
Life Laboratory, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, 
St. Lucia, QLD, Australia.

Bacteria of the phylum Planctomycetes have a unique cell plan with an elaborate 
intracellular membrane system, thereby resembling eukaryotic cells. The origin 
and evolution of these remarkable features is debated. To study the evolutionary 
genomics of bacteria with complex cell architectures, we have resequenced the 
9.2-Mb genome of the model organism Gemmata obscuriglobus and sequenced the 
10-Mb genome of G. massiliana Soil9, the 7.9-Mb genome of CJuql4, and the 6.7-Mb 
genome of Tuwongella immobilis, all of which belong to the family Gemmataceae. A 
gene flux analysis of the Planctomycetes revealed a massive emergence of novel 
protein families at multiple nodes within the Gemmataceae. The expanded protein 
families have unique multidomain architectures composed of domains that are 
characteristic of prokaryotes, such as the sigma factor domain of 
extracytoplasmic sigma factors, and domains that have proliferated in 
eukaryotes, such as the WD40, leucine-rich repeat, tetratricopeptide repeat and 
Ser/Thr kinase domains. Proteins with identifiable domains in the Gemmataceae 
have longer lengths and linkers than proteins in most other bacteria, and the 
analyses suggest that these traits were ancestrally present in the 
Planctomycetales. A broad comparison of protein length distribution profiles 
revealed an overlap between the longest proteins in prokaryotes and the shortest 
proteins in eukaryotes. We conclude that the many similarities between proteins 
in the Planctomycetales and the eukaryotes are due to convergent evolution and 
that there is no strict boundary between prokaryotes and eukaryotes with regard 
to features such as gene paralogy, protein length, and protein domain 
composition patterns.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz287
PMID: 31808939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1401. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1056-1069. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz289.

The Laboratory Domestication of Zebrafish: From Diverse Populations to Inbred 
Substrains.

Suurväli J(1), Whiteley AR(2), Zheng Y(1), Gharbi K(3)(4), Leptin M(1), Wiehe 
T(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Wildlife Biology Program, Department of Ecosystem and Conservation Sciences, 
College of Forestry and Conservation, University of Montana, Missoula, MT.
(3)Edinburgh Genomics, Ashworth Laboratories, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)Earlham Institute, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, United Kingdom.

We know from human genetic studies that practically all aspects of biology are 
strongly influenced by the genetic background, as reflected in the advent of 
"personalized medicine." Yet, with few exceptions, this is not taken into 
account when using laboratory populations as animal model systems for research 
in these fields. Laboratory strains of zebrafish (Danio rerio) are widely used 
for research in vertebrate developmental biology, behavior, and physiology, for 
modeling diseases, and for testing pharmaceutic compounds in vivo. However, all 
of these strains are derived from artificial bottleneck events and therefore are 
likely to represent only a fraction of the genetic diversity present within the 
species. Here, we use restriction site-associated DNA sequencing to genetically 
characterize wild populations of zebrafish from India, Nepal, and Bangladesh, 
and to compare them to previously published data on four common laboratory 
strains. We measured nucleotide diversity, heterozygosity, and allele frequency 
spectra, and find that wild zebrafish are much more diverse than laboratory 
strains. Further, in wild zebrafish, there is a clear signal of GC-biased gene 
conversion that is missing in laboratory strains. We also find that zebrafish 
populations in Nepal and Bangladesh are most distinct from all other strains 
studied, making them an attractive subject for future studies of zebrafish 
population genetics and molecular ecology. Finally, isolates of the same strains 
kept in different laboratories show a pattern of ongoing differentiation into 
genetically distinct substrains. Together, our findings broaden the basis for 
future genetic, physiological, pharmaceutic, and evolutionary studies in Danio 
rerio.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz289
PMCID: PMC7086173
PMID: 31808937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1402. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1090-1099. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz292.

Evolution of a Novel and Adaptive Floral Scent in Wild Tobacco.

Guo H(1), Lackus ND(2), Köllner TG(2), Li R(1), Bing J(1), Wang Y(3), Baldwin 
IT(1), Xu S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Ecology, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, 
Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Jena, 
Germany.
(3)Institute for Evolution and Biodiversity, University of Münster, Münster, 
Germany.

Many plants emit diverse floral scents that mediate plant-environment 
interactions and attain reproductive success. However, how plants evolve novel 
and adaptive biosynthetic pathways for floral volatiles remains unclear. Here, 
we show that in the wild tobacco, Nicotiana attenuata, a dominant 
species-specific floral volatile (benzyl acetone, BA) that attracts pollinators 
and deters florivore is synthesized by phenylalanine ammonia-lyase 4 (NaPAL4), 
isoflavone reductase 3 (NaIFR3), and chalcone synthase 3 (NaCHAL3). Transient 
expression of NaFIR3 alone in N. attenuata leaves is sufficient and necessary 
for ectopic foliar BA emissions, and coexpressing NaIFR3 with NaPAL4 and NaCHAL3 
increased the BA emission levels. Independent changes in transcription of NaPAL4 
and NaCHAL3 contributed to intraspecific variations of floral BA emission. 
However, among species, the gain of expression of NaIFR3 resulted in the 
biosynthesis of BA, which was only found in N. attenuata. This study suggests 
that novel metabolic pathways associated with adaptation can arise via 
reconfigurations of gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz292
PMID: 31808808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1403. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):849-863. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz273.

Early Stage Adaptation of a Mesophilic Green Alga to Antarctica: Systematic 
Increases in Abundance of Enzymes and LEA Proteins.

Wang Y(1)(2), Liu X(1), Gao H(1)(2), Zhang HM(3), Guo AY(3), Xu J(4), Xu 
X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of 
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Algal Biology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(3)College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(4)Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess Technology, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Qingdao, Shandong, China.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):940-941.

It is known that adaptive evolution in permanently cold environments drives cold 
adaptation in enzymes. However, how the relatively high enzyme activities were 
achieved in cold environments prior to cold adaptation of enzymes is unclear. 
Here we report that an Antarctic strain of Chlorella vulgaris, called NJ-7, 
acquired the capability to grow at near 0 °C temperatures and greatly enhanced 
freezing tolerance after systematic increases in abundance of enzymes/proteins 
and positive selection of certain genes. Having diverged from the temperate 
strain UTEX259 of the same species 2.5 (1.1-4.1) to 2.6 (1.0-4.5) Ma, NJ-7 
retained the basic mesophilic characteristics and genome structures. Nitrate 
reductases in the two strains are highly similar in amino acid sequence and 
optimal temperature, but the NJ-7 one showed significantly higher abundance and 
activity. Quantitative proteomic analyses indicated that several cryoprotective 
proteins (LEA), many enzymes involved in carbon metabolism and a large number of 
other enzymes/proteins, were more abundant in NJ-7 than in UTEX259. Like nitrate 
reductase, most of these enzymes were not upregulated in response to cold 
stress. Thus, compensation of low specific activities by increased enzyme 
abundance appears to be an important strategy for early stage cold adaptation to 
Antarctica, but such enzymes are mostly not involved in cold acclimation upon 
transfer from favorable temperatures to near 0 °C temperatures.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz273
PMCID: PMC7038666
PMID: 31794607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1404. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1007-1019. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz283.

Mutations Beget More Mutations-Rapid Evolution of Mutation Rate in Response to 
the Risk of Runaway Accumulation.

Ruan Y(1), Wang H(1), Chen B(1), Wen H(1), Wu CI(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

The rapidity with which the mutation rate evolves could greatly impact 
evolutionary patterns. Nevertheless, most studies simply assume a constant rate 
in the time scale of interest (Kimura 1983; Drake 1991; Kumar 2005; Li 2007; 
Lynch 2010). In contrast, recent studies of somatic mutations suggest that the 
mutation rate may vary by several orders of magnitude within a lifetime (Kandoth 
et al. 2013; Lawrence et al. 2013). To resolve the discrepancy, we now propose a 
runaway model, applicable to both the germline and soma, whereby mutator 
mutations form a positive-feedback loop. In this loop, any mutator mutation 
would increase the rate of acquiring the next mutator, thus triggering a runaway 
escalation in mutation rate. The process can be initiated more readily if there 
are many weak mutators than a few strong ones. Interestingly, even a small 
increase in the mutation rate at birth could trigger the runaway process, 
resulting in unfit progeny. In slowly reproducing species, the need to minimize 
the risk of this uncontrolled accumulation would thus favor setting the mutation 
rate low. In comparison, species that starts and ends reproduction sooner do not 
face the risk and may set the baseline mutation rate higher. The mutation rate 
would evolve in response to the risk of runaway mutation, in particular, when 
the generation time changes. A rapidly evolving mutation rate may shed new 
lights on many evolutionary phenomena (Elango et al. 2006; Thomas et al. 2010, 
2018; Langergraber et al. 2012; Besenbacher et al. 2019).

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz283
PMID: 31778175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1405. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):943-951. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz280.

Genetic Landscapes Reveal How Human Genetic Diversity Aligns with Geography.

Peter BM(1)(2), Petkova D(3), Novembre J(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Wellcome Trust Center for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Ecology & Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Geographic patterns in human genetic diversity carry footprints of population 
history and provide insights for genetic medicine and its application across 
human populations. Summarizing and visually representing these patterns of 
diversity has been a persistent goal for human geneticists, and has revealed 
that genetic differentiation is frequently correlated with geographic distance. 
However, most analytical methods to represent population structure do not 
incorporate geography directly, and it must be considered post hoc alongside a 
visual summary of the genetic structure. Here, we estimate "effective migration" 
surfaces to visualize how human genetic diversity is geographically structured. 
The results reveal local patterns of differentiation in detail and emphasize 
that while genetic similarity generally decays with geographic distance, the 
relationship is often subtly distorted. Overall, the visualizations provide a 
new perspective on genetics and geography in humans and insight to the 
geographic distribution of human genetic variation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz280
PMCID: PMC7086171
PMID: 31778174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1406. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):864-880. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz274.

The Loci of Behavioral Evolution: Evidence That Fas2 and tilB Underlie 
Differences in Pupation Site Choice Behavior between Drosophila melanogaster and 
D. simulans.

Pischedda A(1), Shahandeh MP(2), Turner TL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Barnard College, Columbia University, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Marine Biology, University of 
California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA.

The behaviors of closely related species can be remarkably different, and these 
differences have important ecological and evolutionary consequences. Although 
the recent boom in genotype-phenotype studies has led to a greater understanding 
of the genetic architecture and evolution of a variety of traits, studies 
identifying the genetic basis of behaviors are, comparatively, still lacking. 
This is likely because they are complex and environmentally sensitive 
phenotypes, making them difficult to measure reliably for association studies. 
The Drosophila species complex holds promise for addressing these challenges, as 
the behaviors of closely related species can be readily assayed in a common 
environment. Here, we investigate the genetic basis of an evolved behavioral 
difference, pupation site choice, between Drosophila melanogaster and 
D. simulans. In this study, we demonstrate a significant contribution of the X 
chromosome to the difference in pupation site choice behavior between these 
species. Using a panel of X-chromosome deficiencies, we screened the majority of 
the X chromosome for causal loci and identified two regions associated with this 
X-effect. We then collect gene disruption and RNAi data supporting a single gene 
that affects pupation behavior within each region: Fas2 and tilB. Finally, we 
show that differences in tilB expression correlate with the differences in 
pupation site choice behavior between species. This evidence associating two 
genes with differences in a complex, environmentally sensitive behavior 
represents the first step toward a functional and evolutionary understanding of 
this behavioral divergence.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz274
PMCID: PMC7038752
PMID: 31774527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1407. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):811-827. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz269.

Visual Opsin Diversity in Sharks and Rays.

Hart NS(1), Lamb TD(2), Patel HR(3), Chuah A(4), Natoli RC(2)(5), Hudson NJ(6), 
Cutmore SC(7), Davies WIL(8), Collin SP(9), Hunt DM(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 
Australia.
(2)Eccles Institute of Neuroscience, John Curtin School of Medical Research, The 
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(3)Department of Genome Sciences, John Curtin School of Medical Research, The 
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, John Curtin School of 
Medical Research, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(5)ANU Medical School, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, 
Australia.
(6)School of Agriculture and Food Sciences, The University of Queensland, St 
Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(7)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, 
Australia.
(8)Umeå Centre for Molecular Medicine (UCMM), Umeå University, Umeå, Sweden.
(9)School of Life Sciences, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC, Australia.
(10)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Crawley, 
WA, Australia.
(11)Centre for Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Lions Eye Institute, The 
University of Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):940-941.

The diversity of color vision systems found in extant vertebrates suggests that 
different evolutionary selection pressures have driven specializations in 
photoreceptor complement and visual pigment spectral tuning appropriate for an 
animal's behavior, habitat, and life history. Aquatic vertebrates in particular 
show high variability in chromatic vision and have become important models for 
understanding the role of color vision in prey detection, predator avoidance, 
and social interactions. In this study, we examined the capacity for chromatic 
vision in elasmobranch fishes, a group that have received relatively little 
attention to date. We used microspectrophotometry to measure the spectral 
absorbance of the visual pigments in the outer segments of individual 
photoreceptors from several ray and shark species, and we sequenced the opsin 
mRNAs obtained from the retinas of the same species, as well as from additional 
elasmobranch species. We reveal the phylogenetically widespread occurrence of 
dichromatic color vision in rays based on two cone opsins, RH2 and LWS. We also 
confirm that all shark species studied to date appear to be cone monochromats 
but report that in different species the single cone opsin may be of either the 
LWS or the RH2 class. From this, we infer that cone monochromacy in sharks has 
evolved independently on multiple occasions. Together with earlier discoveries 
in secondarily aquatic marine mammals, this suggests that cone-based color 
vision may be of little use for large marine predators, such as sharks, 
pinnipeds, and cetaceans.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz269
PMID: 31770430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1408. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):969-981. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz275.

Gene Duplication Accelerates the Pace of Protein Gain and Loss from Plant 
Organelles.

Costello R(1), Emms DM(1), Kelly S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Organelle biogenesis and function is dependent on the concerted action of both 
organellar-encoded (if present) and nuclear-encoded proteins. Differences 
between homologous organelles across the Plant Kingdom arise, in part, as a 
result of differences in the cohort of nuclear-encoded proteins that are 
targeted to them. However, neither the rate at which differences in protein 
targeting accumulate nor the evolutionary consequences of these changes are 
known. Using phylogenomic approaches coupled to ancestral state estimation, we 
show that the plant organellar proteome has diversified in proportion with 
molecular sequence evolution such that the proteomes of plant chloroplasts and 
mitochondria lose or gain on average 3.6 proteins per million years. We further 
demonstrate that changes in organellar protein targeting are associated with an 
increase in the rate of molecular sequence evolution and that such changes 
predominantly occur in genes with regulatory rather than metabolic functions. 
Finally, we show that gain and loss of protein target signals occurs at a higher 
rate following gene duplication, revealing that gene and genome duplication are 
a key facilitator of plant organelle evolution.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz275
PMCID: PMC7086175
PMID: 31750917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1409. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1224-1236. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz276.

Machine Learning Methods for Predicting Human-Adaptive Influenza A Viruses Based 
on Viral Nucleotide Compositions.

Li J(1), Zhang S(1), Li B(2), Hu Y(1), Kang XP(1), Wu XY(1), Huang MT(1)(3), Li 
YC(1), Zhao ZP(4), Qin CF(1), Jiang T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, 
Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, the Fifth Medical Centre of Chinese PLA 
General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Graduate School, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.
(4)Department of Infection and Immunology, State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and 
Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing, China.

Each influenza pandemic was caused at least partly by avian- and/or swine-origin 
influenza A viruses (IAVs). The timing of and the potential IAVs involved in the 
next pandemic are currently unpredictable. We aim to build machine learning (ML) 
models to predict human-adaptive IAV nucleotide composition. A total of 217,549 
IAV full-length coding sequences of the PB2 (polymerase basic protein-2), PB1, 
PA (polymerase acidic protein), HA (hemagglutinin), NP (nucleoprotein), and NA 
(neuraminidase) segments were decomposed for their codon position-based 
mononucleotides (12 nts) and dinucleotides (48 dnts). A total of 68,742 human 
sequences and 68,739 avian sequences (1:1) were resampled to characterize the 
human adaptation-associated (d)nts with principal component analysis (PCA) and 
other ML models. Then, the human adaptation of IAV sequences was predicted based 
on the characterized (d)nts. Respectively, 9, 12, 11, 13, 10 and 9 
human-adaptive (d)nts were optimized for the six segments. PCA and hierarchical 
clustering analysis revealed the linear separability of the optimized (d)nts 
between the human-adaptive and avian-adaptive sets. The results of the confusion 
matrix and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve indicated 
a high performance of the ML models to predict human adaptation of IAVs. Our 
model performed well in predicting the human adaptation of the swine/avian IAVs 
before and after the 2009 H1N1 pandemic. In conclusion, we identified the human 
adaptation-associated genomic composition of IAV segments. ML models for IAV 
human adaptation prediction using large IAV genomic data sets can facilitate the 
identification of key viral factors that affect virus 
transmission/pathogenicity. Most importantly, it allows the prediction of 
pandemic influenza.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz276
PMCID: PMC7086167
PMID: 31750915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1410. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):839-848. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz272.

Domestication of High-Copy Transposons Underlays the Wheat Small RNA Response to 
an Obligate Pathogen.

Poretti M(1), Praz CR(1), Meile L(2), Kälin C(1), Schaefer LK(1), Schläfli M(1), 
Widrig V(1), Sanchez-Vallet A(2), Wicker T(1), Bourras S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Plant Pathology, Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Forest Mycology and Plant Pathology, Division of Plant 
Pathology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.

Plant genomes have evolved several evolutionary mechanisms to tolerate and make 
use of transposable elements (TEs). Of these, transposon domestication into 
cis-regulatory and microRNA (miRNA) sequences is proposed to contribute to 
abiotic/biotic stress adaptation in plants. The wheat genome is derived at 85% 
from TEs, and contains thousands of miniature inverted-repeat transposable 
elements (MITEs), whose sequences are particularly prone for domestication into 
miRNA precursors. In this study, we investigate the contribution of TEs to the 
wheat small RNA immune response to the lineage-specific, obligate powdery mildew 
pathogen. We show that MITEs of the Mariner superfamily contribute the largest 
diversity of miRNAs to the wheat immune response. In particular, MITE precursors 
of miRNAs are wide-spread over the wheat genome, and highly conserved copies are 
found in the Lr34 and QPm.tut-4A mildew resistance loci. Our work suggests that 
transposon domestication is an important evolutionary force driving miRNA 
functional innovation in wheat immunity.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz272
PMCID: PMC7038664
PMID: 31730193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1411. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):627-638. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz271.

Recurrent Collection of Drosophila melanogaster from Wild African Environments 
and Genomic Insights into Species History.

Sprengelmeyer QD(1), Mansourian S(2), Lange JD(1), Matute DR(3), Cooper BS(4), 
Jirle EV(2), Stensmyr MC(2), Pool JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI.
(2)Department of Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(3)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.
(4)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Sep 1;37(9):2775.

A long-standing enigma concerns the geographic and ecological origins of the 
intensively studied vinegar fly, Drosophila melanogaster. This globally 
distributed human commensal is thought to originate from sub-Saharan Africa, yet 
until recently, it had never been reported from undisturbed wilderness 
environments that could reflect its precommensal niche. Here, we document the 
collection of 288 D. melanogaster individuals from multiple African wilderness 
areas in Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Namibia. The presence of D. melanogaster in these 
remote woodland environments is consistent with an ancestral range in 
southern-central Africa, as opposed to equatorial regions. After sequencing the 
genomes of 17 wilderness-collected flies collected from Kafue National Park in 
Zambia, we found reduced genetic diversity relative to town populations, 
elevated chromosomal inversion frequencies, and strong differences at specific 
genes including known insecticide targets. Combining these genomes with existing 
data, we probed the history of this species' geographic expansion. Demographic 
estimates indicated that expansion from southern-central Africa began ∼10,000 
years ago, with a Saharan crossing soon after, but expansion from the Middle 
East into Europe did not begin until roughly 1,400 years ago. This improved 
model of demographic history will provide an important resource for future 
evolutionary and genomic studies of this key model organism. Our findings add 
context to the history of D. melanogaster, while opening the door for future 
studies on the biological basis of adaptation to human environments.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz271
PMCID: PMC7038662
PMID: 31730190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1412. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):475-487. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz234.

Dissecting the Transcriptomic Basis of Phenotypic Evolution in an Aquatic 
Keystone Grazer.

Frisch D(1), Becker D(1)(2)(3), Wojewodzic MW(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
(3)Department of Animal and Plant Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Research, Cancer Registry of Norway, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1546.

Knowledge of the molecular basis of phenotypic responses to environmental cues 
is key to understanding the process of adaptation. Insights to adaptation at an 
evolutionary time scale can be gained by observing organismal responses before 
and after a shift in environmental conditions, but such observations can rarely 
be made. Using the ecological and genomic model Daphnia, we linked 
transcriptomic responses and phosphorus (P)-related phenotypic traits under high 
and low P availability. We mapped weighted gene coexpression networks to traits 
previously assessed in resurrected ancient (600 years old) and modern Daphnia 
pulicaria from a lake with a historic shift in P-enrichment. Subsequently, we 
assessed evolutionary conservation or divergence in transcriptional networks of 
the same isolates. We discovered highly preserved gene networks shared between 
ancient genotypes and their modern descendants, but also detected clear evidence 
of transcriptional divergence between these evolutionarily separated genotypes. 
Our study highlights that phenotypic evolution is a result of molecular 
fine-tuning on different layers ranging from basic cellular responses to higher 
order phenotypes. In a broader context, these findings advance our understanding 
how populations are able to persist throughout major environmental shifts.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz234
PMID: 31722403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1413. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):828-838. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz270.

Somatic Mutations and Genome Stability Maintenance in Clonal Coral Colonies.

López EH(1), Palumbi SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, Hopkins Marine Station, Stanford University, Pacific 
Grove, CA.

One challenge for multicellular organisms is maintaining genome stability in the 
face of mutagens across long life spans. Imperfect genome maintenance leads to 
mutation accumulation in somatic cells, which is associated with tumors and 
senescence in vertebrates. Colonial reef-building corals are often large, can 
live for hundreds of years, rarely develop recognizable tumors, and are thought 
to convert somatic cells into gamete producers, so they are a pivotal group in 
which to understand long-term genome maintenance. To measure rates and patterns 
of somatic mutations, we analyzed transcriptomes from 17 to 22 branches from 
each of four Acropora hyacinthus colonies, determined putative single nucleotide 
variants, and verified them with Sanger resequencing. Unlike for human skin 
carcinomas, there is no signature of mutations caused by UV damage, indicating 
either higher efficiency of repair than in vertebrates, or strong sunscreen 
protection in these shallow water tropical animals. The somatic mutation 
frequency per nucleotide in A. hyacinthus is on the same order of magnitude 
(10-7) as noncancerous human somatic cells, and accumulation of mutations with 
age is similar. Loss of heterozygosity variants outnumber gain of heterozygosity 
mutations ∼2:1. Although the mutation frequency is similar in mammals and 
corals, the preponderance of loss of heterozygosity changes and potential 
selection may reduce the frequency of deleterious mutations in colonial animals 
like corals. This may limit the deleterious effects of somatic mutations on the 
coral organism as well as potential offspring.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz270
PMID: 31722397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1414. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):799-810. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz268.

Developmental Systems Drift and the Drivers of Sex Chromosome Evolution.

Cauret CMS(1), Gansauge MT(2), Tupper AS(3), Furman BLS(1)(4), Knytl M(1)(5), 
Song XY(1), Greenbaum E(6), Meyer M(2), Evans BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Biology Department, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Origins Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Science, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada.
(4)Department of Zoology, Biodiversity Research Centre, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(5)Department of Cell Biology, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Texas at El Paso, El 
Paso, TX.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1844.

Phenotypic invariance-the outcome of purifying selection-is a hallmark of 
biological importance. However, invariant phenotypes might be controlled by 
diverged genetic systems in different species. Here, we explore how an important 
and invariant phenotype-the development of sexually differentiated 
individuals-is controlled in over two dozen species in the frog family Pipidae. 
We uncovered evidence in different species for 1) an ancestral W chromosome that 
is not found in many females and is found in some males, 2) independent losses 
and 3) autosomal segregation of this W chromosome, 4) changes in male versus 
female heterogamy, and 5) substantial variation among species in recombination 
suppression on sex chromosomes. We further provide evidence of, and evolutionary 
context for, the origins of at least seven distinct systems for regulating sex 
determination among three closely related genera. These systems are distinct in 
their genomic locations, evolutionary origins, and/or male versus female 
heterogamy. Our findings demonstrate that the developmental control of sexual 
differentiation changed via loss, sidelining, and empowerment of a 
mechanistically influential gene, and offer insights into novel factors that 
impinge on the diverse evolutionary fates of sex chromosomes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz268
PMID: 31710681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1415. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):904-922. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz263.

Optimizing Phylogenomics with Rapidly Evolving Long Exons: Comparison with 
Anchored Hybrid Enrichment and Ultraconserved Elements.

Karin BR(1)(2), Gamble T(3)(4)(5), Jackman TR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Villanova University, Villanova, PA.
(2)Museum of Vertebrate Zoology and Department of Integrative Biology, 
University of California, Berkeley, CA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Marquette University, Milwaukee, WI.
(4)Milwaukee Public Museum, Milwaukee, WI.
(5)Bell Museum of Natural History, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN.

Marker selection has emerged as an important component of phylogenomic study 
design due to rising concerns of the effects of gene tree estimation error, 
model misspecification, and data-type differences. Researchers must balance 
various trade-offs associated with locus length and evolutionary rate among 
other factors. The most commonly used reduced representation data sets for 
phylogenomics are ultraconserved elements (UCEs) and Anchored Hybrid Enrichment 
(AHE). Here, we introduce Rapidly Evolving Long Exon Capture (RELEC), a new set 
of loci that targets single exons that are both rapidly evolving (evolutionary 
rate faster than RAG1) and relatively long in length (>1,500 bp), while at the 
same time avoiding paralogy issues across amniotes. We compare the RELEC data 
set to UCEs and AHE in squamate reptiles by aligning and analyzing orthologous 
sequences from 17 squamate genomes, composed of 10 snakes and 7 lizards. The 
RELEC data set (179 loci) outperforms AHE and UCEs by maximizing per-locus 
genetic variation while maintaining presence and orthology across a range of 
evolutionary scales. RELEC markers show higher phylogenetic informativeness than 
UCE and AHE loci, and RELEC gene trees show greater similarity to the species 
tree than AHE or UCE gene trees. Furthermore, with fewer loci, RELEC remains 
computationally tractable for full Bayesian coalescent species tree analyses. We 
contrast RELEC to and discuss important aspects of comparable methods, and 
demonstrate how RELEC may be the most effective set of loci for resolving 
difficult nodes and rapid radiations. We provide several resources for capturing 
or extracting RELEC loci from other amniote groups.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz263
PMCID: PMC7038749
PMID: 31710677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1416. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):611-626. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz267.

Ancient DNA Reconstructs the Genetic Legacies of Precontact Puerto Rico 
Communities.

Nieves-Colón MA(1)(2), Pestle WJ(3), Reynolds AW(4), Llamas B(5), de la Fuente 
C(6), Fowler K(1), Skerry KM(1)(7), Crespo-Torres E(8), Bustamante CD(9), Stone 
AC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe, 
AZ.
(2)National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity (UGA-LANGEBIO), CINVESTAV, 
Irapuato, Guanajuato, Mexico.
(3)Department of Anthropology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL.
(4)Department of Anthropology, University of California, Davis, CA.
(5)Australian Centre for Ancient DNA, School of Biological Sciences and 
Environment Institute, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(7)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(8)Forensic Anthropology and Bioarcheology Laboratory, University of Puerto 
Rico, Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico.
(9)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.

Indigenous peoples have occupied the island of Puerto Rico since at least 3000 
BC. Due to the demographic shifts that occurred after European contact, the 
origin(s) of these ancient populations, and their genetic relationship to 
present-day islanders, are unclear. We use ancient DNA to characterize the 
population history and genetic legacies of precontact Indigenous communities 
from Puerto Rico. Bone, tooth, and dental calculus samples were collected from 
124 individuals from three precontact archaeological sites: Tibes, Punta 
Candelero, and Paso del Indio. Despite poor DNA preservation, we used target 
enrichment and high-throughput sequencing to obtain complete mitochondrial 
genomes (mtDNA) from 45 individuals and autosomal genotypes from two 
individuals. We found a high proportion of Native American mtDNA haplogroups A2 
and C1 in the precontact Puerto Rico sample (40% and 44%, respectively). This 
distribution, as well as the haplotypes represented, supports a primarily 
Amazonian South American origin for these populations and mirrors the Native 
American mtDNA diversity patterns found in present-day islanders. Three mtDNA 
haplotypes from precontact Puerto Rico persist among Puerto Ricans and other 
Caribbean islanders, indicating that present-day populations are reservoirs of 
precontact mtDNA diversity. Lastly, we find similarity in autosomal ancestry 
patterns between precontact individuals from Puerto Rico and the Bahamas, 
suggesting a shared component of Indigenous Caribbean ancestry with close 
affinity to South American populations. Our findings contribute to a more 
complete reconstruction of precontact Caribbean population history and explore 
the role of Indigenous peoples in shaping the biocultural diversity of 
present-day Puerto Ricans and other Caribbean islanders.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz267
PMID: 31710665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1417. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):786-798. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz266.

Diet and Adaptive Evolution of Alanine-Glyoxylate Aminotransferase Mitochondrial 
Targeting in Birds.

Wang BJ(1), Xia JM(1), Wang Q(1), Yu JL(2), Song Z(2), Zhao H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Adaptations to different diets represent a hallmark of animal diversity. The 
diets of birds are highly variable, making them an excellent model system for 
studying adaptive evolution driven by dietary changes. To test whether molecular 
adaptations to diet have occurred during the evolution of birds, we examined a 
dietary enzyme alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT), which tends to target 
mitochondria in carnivorous mammals, peroxisomes in herbivorous mammals, and 
both mitochondria and peroxisomes in omnivorous mammals. A total of 31 bird 
species were examined in this study, which included representatives of most 
major avian lineages. Of these, 29 have an intact mitochondrial targeting 
sequence (MTS) of AGT. This finding is in stark contrast to mammals, which 
showed a number of independent losses of the MTS. Our cell-based functional 
assays revealed that the efficiency of AGT mitochondrial targeting was greatly 
reduced in unrelated lineages of granivorous birds, yet it tended to be high in 
insectivorous and carnivorous lineages. Furthermore, we found that proportions 
of animal tissue in avian diets were positively correlated with mitochondrial 
targeting efficiencies that were experimentally determined, but not with those 
that were computationally predicted. Adaptive evolution of AGT mitochondrial 
targeting in birds was further supported by the detection of positive selection 
on MTS regions. Our study contributes to the understanding of how diet drives 
molecular adaptations in animals, and suggests that caution must be taken when 
computationally predicting protein subcellular targeting.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz266
PMID: 31702777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1418. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):730-756. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz261.

Phylogenomics Identifies an Ancestral Burst of Gene Duplications Predating the 
Diversification of Aphidomorpha.

Julca I(1), Marcet-Houben M(1), Cruz F(2), Vargas-Chavez C(3), Johnston JS(4), 
Gómez-Garrido J(2), Frias L(2), Corvelo A(2)(5), Loska D(1), Cámara F(1), Gut 
M(2)(6), Alioto T(2)(6), Latorre A(3)(7), Gabaldón T(1)(6)(8).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science 
and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institute for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), University of Valencia 
and CSIC, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Department of Entomology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
(5)New York Genome Center, New York, NY.
(6)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Department of Experimental and Health 
Sciences, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Joint Unit in Genomics and Health, Foundation for the Promotion of Sanitary 
and Biomedical Research (FISABIO) and University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
(8)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.

Aphids (Aphidoidea) are a diverse group of hemipteran insects that feed on plant 
phloem sap. A common finding in studies of aphid genomes is the presence of a 
large number of duplicated genes. However, when these duplications occurred 
remains unclear, partly due to the high relatedness of sequenced species. To 
better understand the origin of aphid duplications we sequenced and assembled 
the genome of Cinara cedri, an early branching lineage (Lachninae) of the 
Aphididae family. We performed a phylogenomic comparison of this genome with 20 
other sequenced genomes, including the available genomes of five other aphids, 
along with the transcriptomes of two species belonging to Adelgidae (a closely 
related clade to the aphids) and Coccoidea. We found that gene duplication has 
been pervasive throughout the evolution of aphids, including many parallel waves 
of recent, species-specific duplications. Most notably, we identified a 
consistent set of very ancestral duplications, originating from a large-scale 
gene duplication predating the diversification of Aphidomorpha (comprising 
aphids, phylloxerids, and adelgids). Genes duplicated in this ancestral wave are 
enriched in functions related to traits shared by Aphidomorpha, such as 
association with endosymbionts, and adaptation to plant defenses and 
phloem-sap-based diet. The ancestral nature of this duplication wave (106-227 
Ma) and the lack of sufficiently conserved synteny make it difficult to conclude 
whether it originated from a whole-genome duplication event or, alternatively, 
from a burst of large-scale segmental duplications. Genome sequencing of other 
aphid species belonging to different Aphidomorpha and related lineages may 
clarify these findings.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz261
PMCID: PMC7038657
PMID: 31702774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1419. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):609. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz253.

Solving the Riddle of the Evolution of Shine-Dalgarno Based Translation in 
Chloroplasts.

Weiner I(1)(2), Shahar N(1), Marco P(1), Yacoby I(1), Tuller T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Iby and Aladar Fleischman Faculty 
of Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)School of Plant Sciences and Food Security, The George S. Wise Faculty of 
Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)The Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2854-2860.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz253
PMID: 31702002


1420. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):773-785. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz264.

Plasmodium vivax Malaria Viewed through the Lens of an Eradicated European 
Strain.

van Dorp L(1), Gelabert P(2)(3), Rieux A(4), de Manuel M(2), de-Dios T(2), 
Gopalakrishnan S(5), Carøe C(5), Sandoval-Velasco M(5), Fregel R(6)(7), Olalde 
I(8), Escosa R(9), Aranda C(10), Huijben S(11)(12), Mueller I(12)(13)(14), 
Marquès-Bonet T(2)(15)(16)(17), Balloux F(1), Gilbert MTP(5)(18), Lalueza-Fox 
C(2).

Author information:
(1)UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(4)CIRAD, UMR PVBMT, St. Pierre de la Réunion, France.
(5)Section for Evolutionary Genomics, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
The GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, Cell Biology and Genetics, 
Universidad de La Laguna, La Laguna, Spain.
(8)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(9)Consorci de Polítiques Ambientals de les Terres de l'Ebre (COPATE), Deltebre, 
Spain.
(10)Servei de Control de Mosquits, Consell Comarcal del Baix Llobregat, Sant 
Feliu de Llobregat, Spain.
(11)School of Life Sciences, Center for Evolution and Medicine, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ.
(12)ISGlobal, Barcelona Institute for Global Health, Hospital Clínic-Universitat 
de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter & Eliza Hall Institute, 
Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(14)Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(15)Catalan Institution of Research and Advanced Studies (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Spain.
(16)CNAG-CRG, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Centre for Genomic 
Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain.
(17)Institut Català de Paleontologia Miquel Crusafont, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain.
(18)University Museum, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), 
Trondheim, Norway.

The protozoan Plasmodium vivax is responsible for 42% of all cases of malaria 
outside Africa. The parasite is currently largely restricted to tropical and 
subtropical latitudes in Asia, Oceania, and the Americas. Though, it was 
historically present in most of Europe before being finally eradicated during 
the second half of the 20th century. The lack of genomic information on the 
extinct European lineage has prevented a clear understanding of historical 
population structuring and past migrations of P. vivax. We used medical 
microscope slides prepared in 1944 from malaria-affected patients from the Ebro 
Delta in Spain, one of the last footholds of malaria in Europe, to generate a 
genome of a European P. vivax strain. Population genetics and phylogenetic 
analyses placed this strain basal to a cluster including samples from the 
Americas. This genome allowed us to calibrate a genomic mutation rate for 
P. vivax, and to estimate the mean age of the last common ancestor between 
European and American strains to the 15th century. This date points to an 
introduction of the parasite during the European colonization of the Americas. 
In addition, we found that some known variants for resistance to antimalarial 
drugs, including Chloroquine and Sulfadoxine, were already present in this 
European strain, predating their use. Our results shed light on the evolution of 
an important human pathogen and illustrate the value of antique medical 
collections as a resource for retrieving genomic information on pathogens from 
the past.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz264
PMCID: PMC7038659
PMID: 31697387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1421. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):923-932. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz265.

Unbiased Estimation of Linkage Disequilibrium from Unphased Data.

Ragsdale AP(1), Gravel S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Linkage disequilibrium (LD) is used to infer evolutionary history, to identify 
genomic regions under selection, and to dissect the relationship between 
genotype and phenotype. In each case, we require accurate estimates of LD 
statistics from sequencing data. Unphased data present a challenge because 
multilocus haplotypes cannot be inferred exactly. Widely used estimators for the 
common statistics r2 and D2 exhibit large and variable upward biases that 
complicate interpretation and comparison across cohorts. Here, we show how to 
find unbiased estimators for a wide range of two-locus statistics, including D2, 
for both single and multiple randomly mating populations. These unbiased 
statistics are particularly well suited to estimate effective population sizes 
from unlinked loci in small populations. We develop a simple inference pipeline 
and use it to refine estimates of recent effective population sizes of the 
threatened Channel Island Fox populations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz265
PMCID: PMC7038669
PMID: 31697386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1422. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):757-772. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz262.

A Burst of Genetic Innovation in Drosophila Actin-Related Proteins for 
Testis-Specific Function.

Schroeder CM(1), Valenzuela JR(1), Mejia Natividad I(1)(2), Hocky GM(3), Malik 
HS(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA.
(2)University of Puget Sound, Tacoma, WA.
(3)Department of Chemistry, New York University, New York, NY.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA.

Many cytoskeletal proteins perform fundamental biological processes and are 
evolutionarily ancient. For example, the superfamily of actin-related proteins 
(Arps) specialized early in eukaryotic evolution for diverse cellular roles in 
the cytoplasm and the nucleus. Despite its strict conservation across 
eukaryotes, we find that the Arp superfamily has undergone dramatic 
lineage-specific diversification in Drosophila. Our phylogenomic analyses reveal 
four independent Arp gene duplications that occurred in the common ancestor of 
the obscura group of Drosophila and have been mostly preserved in this lineage. 
All four obscura-specific Arp paralogs are predominantly expressed in the male 
germline and have evolved under positive selection. We focus our analyses on the 
divergent Arp2D paralog, which arose via a retroduplication event from Arp2, a 
component of the Arp2/3 complex that polymerizes branched actin networks. 
Computational modeling analyses suggest that Arp2D can replace Arp2 in the 
Arp2/3 complex and bind actin monomers. Together with the signature of positive 
selection, our findings suggest that Arp2D may augment Arp2's functions in the 
male germline. Indeed, we find that Arp2D is expressed during and following male 
meiosis, where it localizes to distinct locations such as actin 
cones-specialized cytoskeletal structures that separate bundled spermatids into 
individual mature sperm. We hypothesize that this unprecedented burst of genetic 
innovation in cytoskeletal proteins may have been driven by the evolution of 
sperm heteromorphism in the obscura group of Drosophila.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz262
PMCID: PMC7038667
PMID: 31697328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1423. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):651-659. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz250.

Ancient Adaptive Lateral Gene Transfers in the Symbiotic Opalina-Blastocystis 
Stramenopile Lineage.

Yubuki N(1), Galindo LJ(1), Reboul G(1), López-García P(1), Brown MW(2)(3), 
Pollet N(4), Moreira D(1).

Author information:
(1)Unité d'Ecologie Systématique et Evolution, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, 
AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Mississippi State University, Mississippi 
State, MS.
(3)Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology, Mississippi State 
University, Mississippi State, MS.
(4)Laboratoire Evolution Génomes Comportement et Ecologie, CNRS, IRD, Université 
Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Lateral gene transfer is a very common process in bacterial and archaeal 
evolution, playing an important role in the adaptation to new environments. In 
eukaryotes, its role and frequency remain highly debated, although recent 
research supports that gene transfer from bacteria to diverse eukaryotes may be 
much more common than previously appreciated. However, most of this research 
focused on animals and the true phylogenetic and functional impact of bacterial 
genes in less-studied microbial eukaryotic groups remains largely unknown. Here, 
we have analyzed transcriptome data from the deep-branching stramenopile 
Opalinidae, common members of frog gut microbiomes, and distantly related to the 
well-known genus Blastocystis. Phylogenetic analyses suggest the early 
acquisition of several bacterial genes in a common ancestor of both lineages. 
Those lateral gene transfers most likely facilitated the adaptation of the 
free-living ancestor of the Opalinidae-Blastocystis symbiotic group to new 
niches in the oxygen-depleted animal gut environment.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz250
PMID: 31693153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1424. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):695-710. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz259.

Divergent Selection and Primary Gene Flow Shape Incipient Speciation of a 
Riparian Tree on Hawaii Island.

Choi JY(1), Purugganan M(1)(2), Stacy EA(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biology, New York 
University, New York, NY.
(2)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, NYU Abu Dhabi Research Institute, 
New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(3)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV.

A long-standing goal of evolutionary biology is to understand the mechanisms 
underlying the formation of species. Of particular interest is whether or not 
speciation can occur in the presence of gene flow and without a period of 
physical isolation. Here, we investigated this process within Hawaiian 
Metrosideros, a hypervariable and highly dispersible woody species complex that 
dominates the Hawaiian Islands in continuous stands. Specifically, we 
investigated the origin of Metrosideros polymorpha var. newellii (newellii), a 
riparian ecotype endemic to Hawaii Island that is purportedly derived from the 
archipelago-wide M. polymorpha var. glaberrima (glaberrima). Disruptive 
selection across a sharp forest-riparian ecotone contributes to the isolation of 
these varieties and is a likely driver of newellii's origin. We examined 
genome-wide variation of 42 trees from Hawaii Island and older islands. Results 
revealed a split between glaberrima and newellii within the past 0.3-1.2 My. 
Admixture was extensive between lineages within Hawaii Island and between 
islands, but introgression from populations on older islands (i.e., secondary 
gene flow) did not appear to contribute to the emergence of newellii. In 
contrast, recurrent gene flow (i.e., primary gene flow) between glaberrima and 
newellii contributed to the formation of genomic islands of elevated absolute 
and relative divergence. These regions were enriched for genes with regulatory 
functions as well as for signals of positive selection, especially in newellii, 
consistent with divergent selection underlying their formation. In sum, our 
results support riparian newellii as a rare case of incipient ecological 
speciation with primary gene flow in trees.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz259
PMCID: PMC7038655
PMID: 31693149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1425. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):549-562. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz228.

On the Use of Information Criteria for Model Selection in Phylogenetics.

Susko E(1), Roger AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

The information criteria Akaike information criterion (AIC), AICc, and Bayesian 
information criterion (BIC) are widely used for model selection in 
phylogenetics, however, their theoretical justification and performance have not 
been carefully examined in this setting. Here, we investigate these methods 
under simple and complex phylogenetic models. We show that AIC can give a biased 
estimate of its intended target, the expected predictive log likelihood (EPLnL) 
or, equivalently, expected Kullback-Leibler divergence between the estimated 
model and the true distribution for the data. Reasons for bias include commonly 
occurring issues such as small edge-lengths or, in mixture models, small 
weights. The use of partitioned models is another issue that can cause problems 
with information criteria. We show that for partitioned models, a different BIC 
correction is required for it to be a valid approximation to a Bayes factor. The 
commonly used AICc correction is not clearly defined in partitioned models and 
can actually create a substantial bias when the number of parameters gets large 
as is the case with larger trees and partitioned models. Bias-corrected 
cross-validation corrections are shown to provide better approximations to EPLnL 
than AIC. We also illustrate how EPLnL, the estimation target of AIC, can 
sometimes favor an incorrect model and give reasons for why selection of 
incorrectly under-partitioned models might be desirable in partitioned model 
settings.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz228
PMID: 31688943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1426. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):11-17. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz254.

Improving Cancer Drug Discovery by Studying Cancer across the Tree of Life.

Somarelli JA(1)(2), Boddy AM(3), Gardner HL(4), DeWitt SB(5), Tuohy J(6), 
Megquier K(7), Sheth MU(1)(2), Hsu SD(1)(2), Thorne JL(8)(9), London CA(4), 
Eward WC(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(2)Duke Cancer Institute, Durham, NC.
(3)Department of Anthropology, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa 
Barbara, CA.
(4)Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, Tufts University, Boston, MA.
(5)Department of Orthopaedics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(6)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Blacksburg, VA.
(7)Broad Institute, Massachussettes Institute of Technology and Harvard 
University, Boston, MA.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC.
(9)Department of Statistics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.

Despite a considerable expenditure of time and resources and significant 
advances in experimental models of disease, cancer research continues to suffer 
from extremely low success rates in translating preclinical discoveries into 
clinical practice. The continued failure of cancer drug development, 
particularly late in the course of human testing, not only impacts patient 
outcomes, but also drives up the cost for those therapies that do succeed. It is 
clear that a paradigm shift is necessary if improvements in this process are to 
occur. One promising direction for increasing translational success is 
comparative oncology-the study of cancer across species, often involving 
veterinary patients that develop naturally-occurring cancers. Comparative 
oncology leverages the power of cross-species analyses to understand the 
fundamental drivers of cancer protective mechanisms, as well as factors 
contributing to cancer initiation and progression. Clinical trials in veterinary 
patients with cancer provide an opportunity to evaluate novel therapeutics in a 
setting that recapitulates many of the key features of human cancers, including 
genomic aberrations that underly tumor development, response and resistance to 
treatment, and the presence of comorbidities that can affect outcomes. With a 
concerted effort from basic scientists, human physicians and veterinarians, 
comparative oncology has the potential to enhance the cost-effectiveness and 
efficiency of pipelines for cancer drug discovery and other cancer treatments.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz254
PMCID: PMC8204703
PMID: 31688937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1427. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):711-729. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz260.

Genomic Resources for Darters (Percidae: Etheostominae) Provide Insight into 
Postzygotic Barriers Implicated in Speciation.

Moran RL(1)(2), Catchen JM(1), Fuller RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Program in Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation Biology, Department of Animal 
Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL.
(2)Department of Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior, University of Minnesota, St. 
Paul, MN.

Comparative genomic approaches are increasingly being used to study the 
evolution of reproductive barriers in nonmodel species. Although numerous 
studies have examined prezygotic isolation in darters (Percidae), investigations 
into postzygotic barriers have remained rare due to long generation times and a 
lack of genomic resources. Orangethroat and rainbow darters naturally hybridize 
and provide a remarkable example of male-driven speciation via character 
displacement. Backcross hybrids suffer from high mortality, which appears to 
promote behavioral isolation in sympatry. To investigate the genomic 
architecture of postzygotic isolation, we used Illumina and PacBio sequencing to 
generate a chromosome-level, annotated assembly of the orangethroat darter 
genome and high-density linkage maps for orangethroat and rainbow darters. We 
also analyzed genome-wide RADseq data from wild-caught adults of both species 
and laboratory-generated backcrosses to identify genomic regions associated with 
hybrid incompatibles. Several putative chromosomal translocations and inversions 
were observed between orangethroat and rainbow darters, suggesting structural 
rearrangements may underlie postzygotic isolation. We also found evidence of 
selection against recombinant haplotypes and transmission ratio distortion in 
backcross hybrid genomes, providing further insight into the genomic 
architecture of genetic incompatibilities. Notably, regions with high levels of 
genetic divergence between species were enriched for genes associated with 
developmental and meiotic processes, providing strong candidates for postzygotic 
isolating barriers. These findings mark significant contributions to our 
understanding of the genetic basis of reproductive isolation between species 
undergoing character displacement. Furthermore, the genomic resources presented 
here will be instrumental for studying speciation in darters, the most diverse 
vertebrate group in North America.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz260
PMCID: PMC7038671
PMID: 31688927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1428. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1193-1201. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz258.

Genotyping and De Novo Discovery of Allelic Variants at the Brassicaceae 
Self-Incompatibility Locus from Short-Read Sequencing Data.

Genete M(1), Castric V(1), Vekemans X(1).

Author information:
(1)Univ. Lille, CNRS, UMR 8198 - Evo-Eco-Paleo, F-59000 Lille, France.

Plant self-incompatibility (SI) is a genetic system that prevents selfing and 
enforces outcrossing. Because of strong balancing selection, the genes encoding 
SI are predicted to maintain extraordinarily high levels of polymorphism, both 
in terms of the number of functionally distinct S-alleles that segregate in SI 
species and in terms of their nucleotide sequence divergence. However, because 
of these two combined features, documenting polymorphism of these genes also 
presents important methodological challenges that have so far largely prevented 
the comprehensive analysis of complete allelic series in natural populations, 
and also precluded the obtention of complete genic sequences for many S-alleles. 
Here, we develop a powerful methodological approach based on a computationally 
optimized comparison of short Illumina sequencing reads from genomic DNA to a 
database of known nucleotide sequences of the extracellular domain of SRK 
(eSRK). By examining mapping patterns along the reference sequences, we obtain 
highly reliable predictions of S-genotypes from individuals collected from 
natural populations of Arabidopsis halleri. Furthermore, using a de novo 
assembly approach of the filtered short reads, we obtain full-length sequences 
of eSRK even when the initial sequence in the database was only partial, and we 
discover putative new SRK alleles that were not initially present in the 
database. When including those new alleles in the reference database, we were 
able to resolve the complete diploid SI genotypes of all individuals. Beyond the 
specific case of Brassicaceae S-alleles, our approach can be readily applied to 
other polymorphic loci, given reference allelic sequences are available.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz258
PMID: 31688901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1429. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):608. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz219.

The Epigenetic Signature of Colonizing New Environments in Anolis Lizards.

Hu J, Askary AM, Thurman TJ, Spiller DA, Palmer TM, Pringle RM, Barrett RDH.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2165-2170.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz219
PMID: 31682270


1430. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):683-694. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz255.

Mitochondrial Metagenomics Reveals the Ancient Origin and Phylodiversity of Soil 
Mites and Provides a Phylogeny of the Acari.

Arribas P(1)(2)(3), Andújar C(1)(2)(3), Moraza ML(4), Linard B(2)(5)(6), Emerson 
BC(1), Vogler AP(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Island Ecology and Evolution Research Group, IPNA-CSIC, La Laguna, Tenerife, 
Spain.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Ascot, United Kingdom.
(4)Departamento de Biología Ambiental, Universidad de Navarra, Facultad de 
Ciencias, Pamplona, Spain.
(5)LIRMM, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
(6)ISEM, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, EPHE, CIRAD, INRAP, Montpellier, 
France.

High-throughput DNA methods hold great promise for phylogenetic analysis of 
lineages that are difficult to study with conventional molecular and 
morphological approaches. The mites (Acari), and in particular the highly 
diverse soil-dwelling lineages, are among the least known branches of the 
metazoan Tree-of-Life. We extracted numerous minute mites from soils in an area 
of mixed forest and grassland in southern Iberia. Selected specimens 
representing the full morphological diversity were shotgun sequenced in bulk, 
followed by genome assembly of short reads from the mixture, which produced >100 
mitochondrial genomes representing diverse acarine lineages. Phylogenetic 
analyses in combination with taxonomically limited mitogenomes available 
publicly resulted in plausible trees defining basal relationships of the Acari. 
Several critical nodes were supported by ancestral-state reconstructions of 
mitochondrial gene rearrangements. Molecular calibration placed the minimum age 
for the common ancestor of the superorder Acariformes, which includes most 
soil-dwelling mites, to the Cambrian-Ordovician (likely within 455-552 Ma), 
whereas the origin of the superorder Parasitiformes was placed later in the 
Carboniferous-Permian. Most family-level taxa within the Acariformes were dated 
to the Jurassic and Triassic. The ancient origin of Acariformes and the early 
diversification of major extant lineages linked to the soil are consistent with 
a pioneering role for mites in building the earliest terrestrial ecosystems.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz255
PMID: 31670799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1431. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Apr 1;37(4):1179-1192. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz256.

Protein Structural Information and Evolutionary Landscape by In Vitro Evolution.

Fantini M(1), Lisi S(1), De Los Rios P(2)(3), Cattaneo A(1)(4), Pastore A(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)BioSNS Laboratory of Biology, Scuola Normale Superiore (SNS), Pisa, Italy.
(2)Institute of Physics, School of Basic Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Bioengineering, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)European Brain Research Institute, Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Clinical and Basic Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Institute, King's 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Dementia Research Institute, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Protein structure is tightly intertwined with function according to the laws of 
evolution. Understanding how structure determines function has been the aim of 
structural biology for decades. Here, we have wondered instead whether it is 
possible to exploit the function for which a protein was evolutionary selected 
to gain information on protein structure and on the landscape explored during 
the early stages of molecular and natural evolution. To answer to this question, 
we developed a new methodology, which we named CAMELS (Coupling Analysis by 
Molecular Evolution Library Sequencing), that is able to obtain the in vitro 
evolution of a protein from an artificial selection based on function. We were 
able to observe with CAMELS many features of the TEM-1 beta-lactamase local fold 
exclusively by generating and sequencing large libraries of mutational variants. 
We demonstrated that we can, whenever a functional phenotypic selection of a 
protein is available, sketch the structural and evolutionary landscape of a 
protein without utilizing purified proteins, collecting physical measurements, 
or relying on the pool of natural protein variants.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz256
PMCID: PMC7086169
PMID: 31670785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1432. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):607. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz071.

Convergent Substitutions in a Sodium Channel Suggest Multiple Origins of Toxin 
Resistance in Poison Frogs.

Tarvin RD, Santos JC, O'Connell LA, Zakon HH, Cannatella DC.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Apr;33(4):1068-81.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz071
PMID: 31670781


1433. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):604-606. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz257.

RASP 4: Ancestral State Reconstruction Tool for Multiple Genes and Characters.

Yu Y(1)(2), Blair C(3)(4), He X(1).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Bio-Resources and Eco-Environment of Ministry of Education, 
College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, P.R. China.
(2)Bioinformatics Core, College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, New York City College of Technology, The 
City University of New York, Brooklyn, NY.
(4)Biology PhD Program, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY.

With the continual progress of sequencing techniques, genome-scale data are 
increasingly used in phylogenetic studies. With more data from throughout the 
genome, the relationship between genes and different kinds of characters is 
receiving more attention. Here, we present version 4 of RASP, a software to 
reconstruct ancestral states through phylogenetic trees. RASP can apply 
generalized statistical ancestral reconstruction methods to phylogenies, explore 
the phylogenetic signal of characters to particular trees, calculate distances 
between trees, and cluster trees into groups. RASP 4 has an improved graphic 
user interface and is freely available from http://mnh.scu.edu.cn/soft/blog/RASP 
(program) and https://github.com/sculab/RASP (source code).

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz257
PMID: 31670774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1434. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):488-506. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz235.

Molecular Diversification of the Seminal Fluid Proteome in a Recently Diverged 
Passerine Species Pair.

Rowe M(1)(2)(3), Whittington E(4), Borziak K(4), Ravinet M(2), Eroukhmanoff 
F(2), Sætre GP(2), Dorus S(4).

Author information:
(1)Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis, Department of Biosciences, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Department of Animal Ecology, Netherlands Institute of Ecology (NIOO-KNAW), 
Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Center for Reproductive Evolution, Department of Biology, Syracuse 
University, Syracuse, NY.

Seminal fluid proteins (SFPs) mediate an array of postmating reproductive 
processes that influence fertilization and fertility. As such, it is widely held 
that SFPs may contribute to postmating, prezygotic reproductive barriers between 
closely related taxa. We investigated seminal fluid (SF) diversification in a 
recently diverged passerine species pair (Passer domesticus and Passer 
hispaniolensis) using a combination of proteomic and comparative evolutionary 
genomic approaches. First, we characterized and compared the SF proteome of the 
two species, revealing consistencies with known aspects of SFP biology and 
function in other taxa, including the presence and diversification of proteins 
involved in immunity and sperm maturation. Second, using whole-genome 
resequencing data, we assessed patterns of genomic differentiation between house 
and Spanish sparrows. These analyses detected divergent selection on 
immunity-related SF genes and positive selective sweeps in regions containing a 
number of SF genes that also exhibited protein abundance diversification between 
species. Finally, we analyzed the molecular evolution of SFPs across 11 
passerine species and found a significantly higher rate of positive selection in 
SFPs compared with the rest of the genome, as well as significant enrichments 
for functional pathways related to immunity in the set of positively selected SF 
genes. Our results suggest that selection on immunity pathways is an important 
determinant of passerine SF composition and evolution. Assessing the role of 
immunity genes in speciation in other recently diverged taxa should be 
prioritized given the potential role for immunity-related proteins in 
reproductive incompatibilities in Passer sparrows.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz235
PMCID: PMC6993853
PMID: 31665510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1435. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):576-592. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz243.

Evolutionary Analyses of Base-Pairing Interactions in DNA and RNA Secondary 
Structures.

Golden M(1)(2), Murrell B(3), Martin D(4), Pybus OG(2), Hein J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Integrative Biomedical Sciences, Computational Biology Group, 
Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, 
Cape Town, South Africa.

Pairs of nucleotides within functional nucleic acid secondary structures often 
display evidence of coevolution that is consistent with the maintenance of 
base-pairing. Here, we introduce a sequence evolution model, MESSI (Modeling the 
Evolution of Secondary Structure Interactions), that infers coevolution 
associated with base-paired sites in DNA or RNA sequence alignments. MESSI can 
estimate coevolution while accounting for an unknown secondary structure. MESSI 
can also use graphics processing unit parallelism to increase computational 
speed. We used MESSI to infer coevolution associated with GC, AU (AT in DNA), GU 
(GT in DNA) pairs in noncoding RNA alignments, and in single-stranded RNA and 
DNA virus alignments. Estimates of GU pair coevolution were found to be higher 
at base-paired sites in single-stranded RNA viruses and noncoding RNAs than 
estimates of GT pair coevolution in single-stranded DNA viruses. A potential 
biophysical explanation is that GT pairs do not stabilize DNA secondary 
structures to the same extent that GU pairs do in RNA. Additionally, MESSI 
estimates the degrees of coevolution at individual base-paired sites in an 
alignment. These estimates were computed for a SHAPE-MaP-determined HIV-1 NL4-3 
RNA secondary structure. We found that estimates of coevolution were more 
strongly correlated with experimentally determined SHAPE-MaP pairing scores than 
three nonevolutionary measures of base-pairing covariation. To assist 
researchers in prioritizing substructures with potential functionality, MESSI 
automatically ranks substructures by degrees of coevolution at base-paired sites 
within them. Such a ranking was created for an HIV-1 subtype B alignment, 
revealing an excess of top-ranking substructures that have been previously 
identified as having structure-related functional importance, among several 
uncharacterized top-ranking substructures.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz243
PMCID: PMC6993869
PMID: 31665393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1436. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):639-650. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz249.

HLA Heterozygote Advantage against HIV-1 Is Driven by Quantitative and 
Qualitative Differences in HLA Allele-Specific Peptide Presentation.

Arora J(1), Pierini F(1), McLaren PJ(2)(3), Carrington M(4)(5), Fellay 
J(6)(7)(8), Lenz TL(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Group for Evolutionary Immunogenomics, Max Planck Institute for 
Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(2)JC Wilt Infectious Diseases Research Center, National HIV and Retrovirology 
Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(4)Basic Science Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, 
Frederick, MD.
(5)Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
(6)Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(7)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(8)Precision Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital and University of 
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Pathogen-mediated balancing selection is regarded as a key driver of host 
immunogenetic diversity. A hallmark for balancing selection in humans is the 
heterozygote advantage at genes of the human leukocyte antigen (HLA), resulting 
in improved HIV-1 control. However, the actual mechanism of the observed 
heterozygote advantage is still elusive. HLA heterozygotes may present a broader 
array of antigenic viral peptides to immune cells, possibly resulting in a more 
efficient cytotoxic T-cell response. Alternatively, heterozygosity may simply 
increase the chance to carry the most protective HLA alleles, as individual HLA 
alleles are known to differ substantially in their association with HIV-1 
control. Here, we used data from 6,311 HIV-1-infected individuals to explore the 
relative contribution of quantitative and qualitative aspects of peptide 
presentation in HLA heterozygote advantage against HIV. Screening the entire 
HIV-1 proteome, we observed that heterozygous individuals exhibited a broader 
array of HIV-1 peptides presented by their HLA class I alleles. In addition, 
viral load was negatively correlated with the breadth of the HIV-1 peptide 
repertoire bound by an individual's HLA variants, particularly at HLA-B. This 
suggests that heterozygote advantage at HLA-B is at least in part mediated by 
quantitative peptide presentation. We also observed higher HIV-1 sequence 
diversity among HLA-B heterozygous individuals, suggesting stronger evolutionary 
pressure from HLA heterozygosity. However, HLA heterozygotes were also more 
likely to carry certain HLA alleles, including the highly protective HLA-B*57:01 
variant, indicating that HLA heterozygote advantage ultimately results from a 
combination of quantitative and qualitative effects in antigen presentation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz249
PMCID: PMC7038656
PMID: 31651980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1437. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):893-903. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz248.

A Bayesian Framework for Inferring the Influence of Sequence Context on Point 
Mutations.

Ling G(1), Miller D(1), Nielsen R(2)(3)(4), Stern A(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Molecular Cell Biology and Biotechnology, Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
(4)Center for Computational Biology at UC Berkeley (CCB), Berkeley, CA.
(5)Edmond J. Safra Center for Bioinformatics at Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, 
Israel.

The probability of point mutations is expected to be highly influenced by the 
flanking nucleotides that surround them, known as the sequence context. This 
phenomenon may be mainly attributed to the enzyme that modifies or mutates the 
genetic material, because most enzymes tend to have specific sequence contexts 
that dictate their activity. Here, we develop a statistical model that allows 
for the detection and evaluation of the effects of different sequence contexts 
on mutation rates from deep population sequencing data. This task is 
computationally challenging, as the complexity of the model increases 
exponentially as the context size increases. We established our novel Bayesian 
method based on sparse model selection methods, with the leading assumption that 
the number of actual sequence contexts that directly influence mutation rates is 
minuscule compared with the number of possible sequence contexts. We show that 
our method is highly accurate on simulated data using pentanucleotide contexts, 
even when accounting for noisy data. We next analyze empirical population 
sequencing data from polioviruses and HIV-1 and detect a significant enrichment 
in sequence contexts associated with deamination by the cellular deaminases ADAR 
1/2 and APOBEC3G, respectively. In the current era, where next-generation 
sequencing data are highly abundant, our approach can be used on any population 
sequencing data to reveal context-dependent base alterations and may assist in 
the discovery of novel mutable sites or editing sites.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz248
PMCID: PMC7038660
PMID: 31651955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1438. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):660-667. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz251.

OxyR Is a Convergent Target for Mutations Acquired during Adaptation to 
Oxidative Stress-Prone Metabolic States.

Anand A(1), Chen K(1), Catoiu E(1), Sastry AV(1), Olson CA(1), Sandberg TE(1), 
Seif Y(1), Xu S(1), Szubin R(1), Yang L(1), Feist AM(1)(2), Palsson BO(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA.
(2)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of 
Denmark, Kemitorvet, Kongens, Lyngby, Denmark.

Oxidative stress is concomitant with aerobic metabolism. Thus, bacterial genomes 
encode elaborate mechanisms to achieve redox homeostasis. Here we report that 
the peroxide-sensing transcription factor, oxyR, is a common mutational target 
using bacterial species belonging to two genera, Escherichia coli and Vibrio 
natriegens, in separate growth conditions implemented during laboratory 
evolution. The mutations clustered in the redox active site, dimer interface, 
and flexible redox loop of the protein. These mutations favor the oxidized 
conformation of OxyR that results in constitutive expression of the genes it 
regulates. Independent component analysis of the transcriptome revealed that the 
constitutive activity of OxyR reduces DNA damage from reactive oxygen species, 
as inferred from the activity of the SOS response regulator LexA. This 
adaptation to peroxide stress came at a cost of lower growth, as revealed by 
calculations of proteome allocation using genome-scale models of metabolism and 
macromolecular expression. Further, identification of similar sequence changes 
in natural isolates of E. coli indicates that adaptation to oxidative stress 
through genetic changes in oxyR can be a common occurrence.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz251
PMCID: PMC7038661
PMID: 31651953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1439. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):668-682. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz252.

Higher Gene Flow in Sex-Related Chromosomes than in Autosomes during Fungal 
Divergence.

Hartmann FE(1), Rodríguez de la Vega RC(1), Gladieux P(2), Ma WJ(3), Hood ME(3), 
Giraud T(1).

Author information:
(1)Ecologie Systematique Evolution, Batiment 360, Univ. Paris-Sud, 
AgroParisTech, CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France.
(2)UMR BGPI, Univ Montpellier, INRA, CIRAD, Montpellier SupAgro, Montpellier, 
France.
(3)Biology Department, Science Centre, Amherst College, Amherst, MA.

Nonrecombining sex chromosomes are widely found to be more differentiated than 
autosomes among closely related species, due to smaller effective population 
size and/or to a disproportionally large-X effect in reproductive isolation. 
Although fungal mating-type chromosomes can also display large nonrecombining 
regions, their levels of differentiation compared with autosomes have been 
little studied. Anther-smut fungi from the Microbotryum genus are castrating 
pathogens of Caryophyllaceae plants with largely nonrecombining mating-type 
chromosomes. Using whole genome sequences of 40 fungal strains, we quantified 
genetic differentiation among strains isolated from the geographically 
overlapping North American species and subspecies of Silene virginica and 
S. caroliniana. We inferred that gene flow likely occurred at the early stages 
of divergence and then completely stopped. We identified large autosomal genomic 
regions with chromosomal inversions, with higher genetic divergence than the 
rest of the genomes and highly enriched in selective sweeps, supporting a role 
of rearrangements in preventing gene flow in genomic regions involved in 
ecological divergence. Unexpectedly, the nonrecombining mating-type chromosomes 
showed lower divergence than autosomes due to higher gene flow, which may be 
promoted by adaptive introgressions of less degenerated mating-type chromosomes. 
The fact that both mating-type chromosomes are always heterozygous and 
nonrecombining may explain such patterns that oppose to those found for XY or ZW 
sex chromosomes. The specific features of mating-type chromosomes may also apply 
to the UV sex chromosomes determining sexes at the haploid stage in algae and 
bryophytes and may help test general hypotheses on the evolutionary 
specificities of sex-related chromosomes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz252
PMCID: PMC7038665
PMID: 31651949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1440. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):540-548. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz244.

DNA Methylation Profiles Suggest Intergenerational Transfer of Maternal Effects.

Venney CJ(1), Love OP(2), Drown EJ(3), Heath DD(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Great Lakes Institute for Environmental Research, University of Windsor, 
Windsor, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Yellow Island Aquaculture Ltd., Campbell River, British Columbia, Canada.

The view of maternal effects (nongenetic maternal environmental influence on 
offspring phenotype) has changed from one of distracting complications in 
evolutionary genetics to an important evolutionary mechanism for improving 
offspring fitness. Recent studies have shown that maternal effects act as an 
adaptive mechanism to prepare offspring for stressful environments. Although 
research into the magnitude of maternal effects is abundant, the molecular 
mechanisms of maternal influences on offspring phenotypic variation are not 
fully understood. Despite recent work identifying DNA methylation as a potential 
mechanism of nongenetic inheritance, currently proposed links between DNA 
methylation and parental effects are indirect and primarily involve genomic 
imprinting. We combined a factorial breeding design and gene-targeted sequencing 
methods to assess inheritance of methylation during early life stages at 14 
genes involved in growth, development, metabolism, stress response, and immune 
function of Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha). We found little evidence 
for additive or nonadditive genetic effects acting on methylation levels during 
early development; however, we detected significant maternal effects. Consistent 
with conventional maternal effect data, maternal effects on methylation declined 
through development and were replaced with nonadditive effects when offspring 
began exogenous feeding. We mapped methylation at individual CpG sites across 
the selected candidate genes to test for variation in site-specific methylation 
profiles and found significant maternal effects at selected CpG sites that also 
declined with development stage. While intergenerational inheritance of 
methylated DNA is controversial, we show that CpG-specific methylation may 
function as an underlying molecular mechanism for maternal effects, with 
important implications for offspring fitness.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz244
PMID: 31651942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1441. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):524-539. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz239.

Convergent Evolution of Hydrogenosomes from Mitochondria by Gene Transfer and 
Loss.

Lewis WH(1)(2)(3), Lind AE(2), Sendra KM(1), Onsbring H(2)(3), Williams TA(4), 
Esteban GF(5), Hirt RP(1), Ettema TJG(2)(3), Embley TM(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle-Upon-Tyne, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(3)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Agrotechnology and Food Sciences, 
Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Bournemouth University, Poole, 
United Kingdom.

Hydrogenosomes are H2-producing mitochondrial homologs found in some anaerobic 
microbial eukaryotes that provide a rare intracellular niche for H2-utilizing 
endosymbiotic archaea. Among ciliates, anaerobic and aerobic lineages are 
interspersed, demonstrating that the switch to an anaerobic lifestyle with 
hydrogenosomes has occurred repeatedly and independently. To investigate the 
molecular details of this transition, we generated genomic and transcriptomic 
data sets from anaerobic ciliates representing three distinct lineages. Our data 
demonstrate that hydrogenosomes have evolved from ancestral mitochondria in each 
case and reveal different degrees of independent mitochondrial genome and 
proteome reductive evolution, including the first example of complete 
mitochondrial genome loss in ciliates. Intriguingly, the FeFe-hydrogenase used 
for generating H2 has a unique domain structure among eukaryotes and appears to 
have been present, potentially through a single lateral gene transfer from an 
unknown donor, in the common aerobic ancestor of all three lineages. The early 
acquisition and retention of FeFe-hydrogenase helps to explain the facility 
whereby mitochondrial function can be so radically modified within this diverse 
and ecologically important group of microbial eukaryotes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz239
PMCID: PMC6993867
PMID: 31647561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1442. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):320-326. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz242.

Molecular Biology and Evolution of Cancer: From Discovery to Action.

Somarelli JA(1)(2), Gardner H(3), Cannataro VL(4), Gunady EF(1), Boddy AM(5), 
Johnson NA(6), Fisk JN(7), Gaffney SG(7), Chuang JH(8), Li S(8), Ciccarelli 
FD(9)(10), Panchenko AR(11)(12), Megquier K(13), Kumar S(14), Dornburg A(15), 
DeGregori J(16), Townsend JP(7)(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(2)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC.
(3)Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University, Medford, 
MA.
(4)Department of Biology, Emmanuel College, Boston, MA.
(5)Department of Anthropology, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT.
(8)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT.
(9)Cancer Systems Biology Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, 
United Kingdom.
(10)King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Queen's 
University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(12)Ontario Institute of Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(13)Broad Institute, Massachusettes Institute of Technology and Harvard 
University.
(14)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, and Department of Biology, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.
(15)North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences, Raleigh, NC.
(16)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO.
(17)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT.
(18)Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT.

Cancer progression is an evolutionary process. During this process, evolving 
cancer cell populations encounter restrictive ecological niches within the body, 
such as the primary tumor, circulatory system, and diverse metastatic sites. 
Efforts to prevent or delay cancer evolution-and progression-require a deep 
understanding of the underlying molecular evolutionary processes. Herein we 
discuss a suite of concepts and tools from evolutionary and ecological theory 
that can inform cancer biology in new and meaningful ways. We also highlight 
current challenges to applying these concepts, and propose ways in which 
incorporating these concepts could identify new therapeutic modes and 
vulnerabilities in cancer.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz242
PMCID: PMC6993850
PMID: 31642480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1443. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):429-441. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz226.

Loss of Imprinting in Human Placentas Is Widespread, Coordinated, and Predicts 
Birth Phenotypes.

Vincenz C(1), Lovett JL(2), Wu W(3), Shedden K(4), Strassmann BI(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Group Dynamics, Institute for Social Research, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(2)Department of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)BRCF Bioinformatics Core, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(4)Department of Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Genomic imprinting leads to mono-allelic expression of genes based on parent of 
origin. Therian mammals and angiosperms evolved this mechanism in nutritive 
tissues, the placenta, and endosperm, where maternal and paternal genomes are in 
conflict with respect to resource allocation. We used RNA-seq to analyze allelic 
bias in the expression of 91 known imprinted genes in term human placentas from 
a prospective cohort study in Mali. A large fraction of the imprinted exons 
(39%) deviated from mono-allelic expression. Loss of imprinting (LOI) occurred 
in genes with either maternal or paternal expression bias, albeit more 
frequently in the former. We characterized LOI using binomial generalized linear 
mixed models. Variation in LOI was predominantly at the gene as opposed to the 
exon level, consistent with a single promoter driving the expression of most 
exons in a gene. Some genes were less prone to LOI than others, particularly 
lncRNA genes were rarely expressed from the repressed allele. Further, some 
individuals had more LOI than others and, within a person, the expression bias 
of maternally and paternally imprinted genes was correlated. We hypothesize that 
trans-acting maternal effect genes mediate correlated LOI and provide the mother 
with an additional lever to control fetal growth by extending her influence to 
LOI of the paternally imprinted genes. Limited evidence exists to support 
associations between LOI and offspring phenotypes. We show that birth length and 
placental weight were associated with allelic bias, making this the first 
comprehensive report of an association between LOI and a birth phenotype.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz226
PMCID: PMC6993844
PMID: 31639821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1444. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):280-290. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz236.

Reliable Confidence Intervals for RelTime Estimates of Evolutionary Divergence 
Times.

Tao Q(1)(2), Tamura K(3)(4), Mello B(5), Kumar S(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Hachioji, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Research Center for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Tokyo Metropolitan 
University, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Genetics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(6)Center for Excellence in Genome Medicine and Research, King Abdulaziz 
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

Confidence intervals (CIs) depict the statistical uncertainty surrounding 
evolutionary divergence time estimates. They capture variance contributed by the 
finite number of sequences and sites used in the alignment, deviations of 
evolutionary rates from a strict molecular clock in a phylogeny, and uncertainty 
associated with clock calibrations. Reliable tests of biological hypotheses 
demand reliable CIs. However, current non-Bayesian methods may produce 
unreliable CIs because they do not incorporate rate variation among lineages and 
interactions among clock calibrations properly. Here, we present a new 
analytical method to calculate CIs of divergence times estimated using the 
RelTime method, along with an approach to utilize multiple calibration 
uncertainty densities in dating analyses. Empirical data analyses showed that 
the new methods produce CIs that overlap with Bayesian highest posterior density 
intervals. In the analysis of computer-simulated data, we found that RelTime CIs 
show excellent average coverage probabilities, that is, the actual time is 
contained within the CIs with a 94% probability. These developments will 
encourage broader use of computationally efficient RelTime approaches in 
molecular dating analyses and biological hypothesis testing.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz236
PMCID: PMC6984362
PMID: 31638157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1445. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Mar 1;37(3):881-892. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz232.

Asymmetric Distribution of Gene Trees Can Arise under Purifying Selection If 
Differences in Population Size Exist.

He C(1), Liang D(1), Zhang P(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, College of Ecology and Evolution, School 
of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Incomplete lineage sorting (ILS) is an important factor that causes gene tree 
discordance. For gene trees of three species, under neutrality, random mating, 
and the absence of interspecific gene flow, ILS creates a symmetric distribution 
of gene trees: the gene tree that accords with the species tree has the highest 
frequency, and the two discordant trees are equally frequent. If the neutral 
condition is violated, the impact of ILS may change, altering the gene tree 
distribution. Here, we show that under purifying selection, even assuming that 
the fitness effect of mutations is constant throughout the species tree, if 
differences in population size exist among species, asymmetric distributions of 
gene trees will arise, which is different from the expectation under neutrality. 
In extremes, one of the discordant trees rather than the concordant tree becomes 
the most frequent gene tree. In addition, we found that in a real case, the 
position of Scandentia relative to Primate and Glires, the symmetry in the gene 
tree distribution can be influenced by the strength of purifying selection. In 
current phylogenetic inference, the impact of purifying selection on the gene 
tree distribution is rarely considered by researchers. This study highlights the 
necessity of considering this impact.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz232
PMID: 31638156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1446. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):307-319. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz231.

More Arrows in the Ancient DNA Quiver: Use of Paleoepigenomes and 
Paleomicrobiomes to Investigate Animal Adaptation to Environment.

Liu Y(1), Weyrich LS(1), Llamas B(1).

Author information:
(1)Australian Centre for Ancient DNA, School of Biological Sciences, Environment 
Institute, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Whether and how epigenetic mechanisms and the microbiome play a role in 
mammalian adaptation raised considerable attention and controversy, mainly 
because they have the potential to add new insights into the Modern Synthesis. 
Recent attempts to reconcile neo-Darwinism and neo-Lamarckism in a unified 
theory of molecular evolution give epigenetic mechanisms and microbiome a 
prominent role. However, supporting empirical data are still largely missing. 
Because experimental studies using extant animals can hardly be done over 
evolutionary timescales, we propose that advances in ancient DNA techniques 
provide a valid alternative. In this piece, we evaluate 1) the possible roles of 
epigenomes and microbiomes in animal adaptation, 2) advances in the retrieval of 
paleoepigenome and paleomicrobiome data using ancient DNA techniques, and 3) the 
plasticity of either and interactions between the epigenome and the microbiome, 
while emphasizing that it is essential to take both into account, as well as the 
underlying genetic factors that may confound the findings. We propose that 
advanced ancient DNA techniques should be applied to a wide range of past 
animals, so novel dynamics in animal evolution and adaption can be revealed.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz231
PMID: 31638147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1447. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):469-474. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz233.

Purifying Selection in Corvids Is Less Efficient on Islands.

Kutschera VE(1)(2), Poelstra JW(3), Botero-Castro F(4), Dussex N(5)(6), Gemmell 
NJ(5), Hunt GR(7), Ritchie MG(8), Rutz C(8), Wiberg RAW(8)(9), Wolf JBW(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Biology Department, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, LMU Munich, 
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(5)Department of Anatomy, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(6)Department of Bioinformatics and Genetics, Swedish Museum of Natural History, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Unaffiliated.
(8)Centre for Biological Diversity, School of Biology, University of St Andrews, 
St Andrews, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Environmental Sciences, Evolutionary Biology, University of 
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Theory predicts that deleterious mutations accumulate more readily in small 
populations. As a consequence, mutation load is expected to be elevated in 
species where life-history strategies and geographic or historical contingencies 
reduce the number of reproducing individuals. Yet, few studies have empirically 
tested this prediction using genome-wide data in a comparative framework. We 
collected whole-genome sequencing data for 147 individuals across seven crow 
species (Corvus spp.). For each species, we estimated the distribution of 
fitness effects of deleterious mutations and compared it with proxies of the 
effective population size Ne. Island species with comparatively smaller 
geographic range sizes had a significantly increased mutation load. These 
results support the view that small populations have an elevated risk of 
mutational meltdown, which may contribute to the higher extinction rates 
observed in island species.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz233
PMCID: PMC6993847
PMID: 31633794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1448. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):599-603. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz240.

Treeio: An R Package for Phylogenetic Tree Input and Output with Richly 
Annotated and Associated Data.

Wang LG(1), Lam TT(2), Xu S(1), Dai Z(1), Zhou L(1), Feng T(1), Guo P(1), Dunn 
CW(3), Jones BR(4), Bradley T(5), Zhu H(2)(6)(7), Guan Y(2)(6)(7), Jiang Y(8), 
Yu G(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Disease and Centre of Influenza 
Research, School of Public Health, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, 
China.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT.
(4)British Columbia Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS, Vancouver, Canada.
(5)Civil, Architectural, and Environmental Engineering, Drexel University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(6)Joint Institute of Virology (Shantou University - The University of Hong 
Kong), Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Emerging Infectious Disease (HKU Shenzhen Base), 
Shenzhen Third People's Hospital, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(8)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Proteomics, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Phylogenetic trees and data are often stored in incompatible and inconsistent 
formats. The outputs of software tools that contain trees with analysis findings 
are often not compatible with each other, making it hard to integrate the 
results of different analyses in a comparative study. The treeio package is 
designed to connect phylogenetic tree input and output. It supports extracting 
phylogenetic trees as well as the outputs of commonly used analytical software. 
It can link external data to phylogenies and merge tree data obtained from 
different sources, enabling analyses of phylogeny-associated data from different 
disciplines in an evolutionary context. Treeio also supports export of a 
phylogenetic tree with heterogeneous-associated data to a single tree file, 
including BEAST compatible NEXUS and jtree formats; these facilitate data 
sharing as well as file format conversion for downstream analysis. The treeio 
package is designed to work with the tidytree and ggtree packages. Tree data can 
be processed using the tidy interface with tidytree and visualized by ggtree. 
The treeio package is released within the Bioconductor and rOpenSci projects. It 
is available at https://www.bioconductor.org/packages/treeio/.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz240
PMCID: PMC6993851
PMID: 31633786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1449. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):563-575. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz241.

Living Trees: High-Quality Reproducible and Reusable Construction of Bacterial 
Phylogenetic Trees.

Hu D(1), Liu B(2)(3), Wang L(2)(4)(5)(6), Reeves PR(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia.
(2)TEDA Institute of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, 
Tianjin Economic-Technological Development Area, Tianjin, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)Tianjin Research Center for Functional Genomics and Biochip, Tianjin, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Ministry of Education, The Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and 
Technology, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(5)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomics, Tianjin, People's 
Republic of China.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai University, 
Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

An ideal bacterial phylogenetic tree accurately retraces evolutionary history 
and accurately incorporates mutational, recombination and other events on the 
appropriate branches. Current strain-level bacterial phylogenetic analysis based 
on large numbers of genomes lacks reliability and resolution, and is hard to be 
replicated, confirmed and reused, because of the highly divergent nature of 
microbial genomes. We present SNPs and Recombination Events Tree (SaRTree), a 
pipeline using six "living trees" modules that addresses problems arising from 
the high numbers and variable quality of bacterial genome sequences. It provides 
for reuse of the tree and offers a major step toward global standardization of 
phylogenetic analysis by generating deposit files including all steps involved 
in phylogenetic inference. The tree itself is a "living tree" that can be 
extended by addition of more sequences, or the deposit can be used to vary the 
programs or parameters used, to assess the effect of such changes. This approach 
will allow phylogeny papers to meet the traditional responsibility of providing 
data and analysis that can be repeated and critically evaluated by others. We 
used the Acinetobacter baumannii global clone I to illustrate use of SaRTree to 
optimize tree resolution. An Escherichia coli tree was built from 351 sequences 
selected from 11,162 genome sequences, with the others added back onto 
well-defined branches, to show how this facility can greatly improve the 
outcomes from genome sequencing. SaRTree is designed for prokaryote strain-level 
analysis but could be adapted for other usage.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz241
PMID: 31633785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1450. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):507-523. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz238.

Eutherian-Specific Gene TRIML2 Attenuates Inflammation in the Evolution of 
Placentation.

Zhang X(1)(2)(3), Pavlicev M(1)(2)(3), Jones HN(4)(5), Muglia LJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Center for Prevention of Preterm Birth, Perinatal 
Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH.
(3)March of Dimes Prematurity Research Center Ohio Collaborative, Cincinnati, 
OH.
(4)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, OH.

Evolution of highly invasive placentation in the stem lineage of eutherians and 
subsequent extension of pregnancy set eutherians apart from other mammals, that 
is, marsupials with short-lived placentas, and oviparous monotremes. Recent 
studies suggest that eutherian implantation evolved from marsupial attachment 
reaction, an inflammatory process induced by the direct contact of fetal 
placenta with maternal endometrium after the breakdown of the shell coat, and 
shortly before the onset of parturition. Unique to eutherians, a dramatic 
downregulation of inflammation after implantation prevents the onset of 
premature parturition, and is critical for the maintenance of gestation. This 
downregulation likely involved evolutionary changes on maternal as well as 
fetal/placental side. Tripartite-motif family-like2 (TRIML2) only exists in 
eutherian genomes and shows preferential expression in preimplantation embryos, 
and trophoblast-derived structures, such as chorion and placental disc. 
Comparative genomic evidence supports that TRIML2 originated from a gene 
duplication event in the stem lineage of Eutheria that also gave rise to 
eutherian TRIML1. Compared with TRIML1, TRIML2 lost the catalytic RING domain of 
E3 ligase. However, only TRIML2 is induced in human choriocarcinoma cell line 
JEG3 with poly(I:C) treatment to simulate inflammation during viral infection. 
Its knockdown increases the production of proinflammatory cytokines and reduces 
trophoblast survival during poly(I:C) stimulation, while its overexpression 
reduces proinflammatory cytokine production, supporting TRIML2's role as a 
regulatory inhibitor of the inflammatory pathways in trophoblasts. TRIML2's 
potential virus-interacting PRY/SPRY domain shows significant signature of 
selection, suggesting its contribution to the evolution of eutherian-specific 
inflammation regulation during placentation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz238
PMCID: PMC6993854
PMID: 31633784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1451. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):593-598. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz237.

Computational Framework for High-Quality Production and Large-Scale Evolutionary 
Analysis of Metagenome Assembled Genomes.

Murovec B(1), Deutsch L(2), Stres B(2)(3)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Artificial Sight and Automation, Faculty of Electrical 
Engineering, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Center for Clinical Neurophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)Institute of Sanitary Engineering, Faculty of Civil and Geodetic Engineering, 
University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(5)Department for Automation, Biocybernetics and Robotics, Jozef Štefan 
Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Microbiology, University of 
Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.

Microbial species play important roles in different environments and the 
production of high-quality genomes from metagenome data sets represents a major 
obstacle to understanding their ecological and evolutionary dynamics. 
Metagenome-Assembled Genomes Orchestra (MAGO) is a computational framework that 
integrates and simplifies metagenome assembly, binning, bin improvement, bin 
quality (completeness and contamination), bin annotation, and evolutionary 
placement of bins via detailed maximum-likelihood phylogeny based on multiple 
marker genes using different amino acid substitution models, next to average 
nucleotide identity analysis of genomes for delineation of species boundaries 
and operational taxonomic units. MAGO offers streamlined execution of the entire 
metagenomics pipeline, error checking, computational resource distribution and 
compatibility of data formats, governed by user-tailored pipeline processing. 
MAGO is an open-source-software package released in three different ways, as a 
singularity image and a Docker container for HPC purposes as well as for running 
MAGO on a commodity hardware, and a virtual machine for gaining a full access to 
MAGO underlying structure and source code. MAGO is open to suggestions for 
extensions and is amenable for use in both research and teaching of genomics and 
molecular evolution of genomes assembled from small single-cell projects or 
large-scale and complex environmental metagenomes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz237
PMCID: PMC6993843
PMID: 31633780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1452. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):395-405. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz223.

Human and Nonhuman Primate Lineage-Specific Footprints in the Salivary Proteome.

Thamadilok S(1), Choi KS(2), Ruhl L(2), Schulte F(3), Kazim AL(2), Hardt M(3), 
Gokcumen O(4), Ruhl S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, NY.
(2)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Roswell Park Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY.
(3)Department of Applied Oral Sciences, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Arts and Sciences, University 
at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY.

Proteins in saliva are needed for preprocessing food in the mouth, maintenance 
of tooth mineralization, and protection from microbial pathogens. Novel insights 
into human lineage-specific functions of salivary proteins and clues to their 
involvement in human disease can be gained through evolutionary studies, as 
recently shown for salivary amylase AMY1 and salivary agglutinin DMBT1/gp340. 
However, the entirety of proteins in saliva, the salivary proteome, has not yet 
been investigated from an evolutionary perspective. Here, we compared the 
proteomes of human saliva and the saliva of our closest extant evolutionary 
relatives, chimpanzees and gorillas, using macaques as an outgroup, with the aim 
to uncover features in saliva protein composition that are unique to each 
species. We found that humans produce a waterier saliva, containing less than 
half total protein than great apes and Old World monkeys. For all major salivary 
proteins in humans, we could identify counterparts in chimpanzee and gorilla 
saliva. However, we discovered unique protein profiles in saliva of humans that 
were distinct from those of nonhuman primates. These findings open up the 
possibility that dietary differences and pathogenic pressures may have shaped a 
distinct salivary proteome in the human lineage.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz223
PMCID: PMC6993864
PMID: 31614365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1453. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):442-454. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz227.

You Will Never Walk Alone: Codispersal of JC Polyomavirus with Human 
Populations.

Forni D(1), Cagliani R(1), Clerici M(2)(3), Pozzoli U(1), Sironi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Institute, IRCCS E. MEDEA, Bioinformatics, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Physiopathology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Fondazione Don Carlo Gnocchi, Milan, Italy.

JC polyomavirus (JCPyV) is one of the most prevalent human viruses. Findings 
based on the geographic distribution of viral subtypes suggested that JCPyV 
codiverged with human populations. This view was however challenged by data 
reporting a much more recent origin and expansion of JCPyV. We collected 
information on ∼1,100 worldwide strains and we show that their geographic 
distribution roughly corresponds to major human migratory routes. Bayesian 
phylogeographic analysis inferred a Subsaharan origin for JCPyV, although with 
low posterior probability. High confidence inference at internal nodes provided 
strong support for a long-standing association between the virus and human 
populations. In line with these data, pairwise FST values for JCPyV and human 
mtDNA sampled from the same areas showed a positive and significant correlation. 
Likewise, very strong relationships were found when node ages in the JCPyV 
phylogeny were correlated with human population genetic distances 
(nuclear-marker based FST). Reconciliation analysis detected a significant 
cophylogenetic signal for the human population and JCPyV trees. Notably, JCPyV 
also traced some relatively recent migration events such as the expansion of 
people from the Philippines/Taiwan area into Remote Oceania, the gene flow 
between North-Eastern Siberian and Ainus, and the Koryak contribution to 
Circum-Arctic Americans. Finally, different molecular dating approaches dated 
the origin of JCPyV in a time frame that precedes human out-of-Africa migration. 
Thus, JCPyV infected early human populations and accompanied our species during 
worldwide dispersal. JCPyV typing can provide reliable geographic information 
and the virus most likely adapted to the genetic background of human 
populations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz227
PMID: 31593241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1454. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):406-416. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz224.

Along the Indian Ocean Coast: Genomic Variation in Mozambique Provides New 
Insights into the Bantu Expansion.

Semo A(1), Gayà-Vidal M(1), Fortes-Lima C(2), Alard B(1), Oliveira S(3), Almeida 
J(1), Prista A(4), Damasceno A(5), Fehn AM(1)(6), Schlebusch C(2)(7)(8), Rocha 
J(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)CIBIO - Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, 
Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal.
(2)Department of Organismal Biology, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala 
University, Sweden.
(3)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Faculdade de Educação Física e Desporto, Universidade Pedagógica de 
Moçambique, Maputo, Mozambique.
(5)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Eduardo Mondlane, Maputo, Mozambique.
(6)Department of Linguistic and Cultural Evolution, Max Planck Institute for the 
Science of Human History, Jena, Germany.
(7)Palaeo-Research Institute, University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park, South 
Africa.
(8)SciLifeLab, Uppsala, Sweden.
(9)Departamento de Biologia, Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade do Porto, 
Portugal.

The Bantu expansion, which started in West Central Africa around 5,000 BP, 
constitutes a major migratory movement involving the joint spread of peoples and 
languages across sub-Saharan Africa. Despite the rich linguistic and 
archaeological evidence available, the genetic relationships between different 
Bantu-speaking populations and the migratory routes they followed during various 
phases of the expansion remain poorly understood. Here, we analyze the genetic 
profiles of southwestern and southeastern Bantu-speaking peoples located at the 
edges of the Bantu expansion by generating genome-wide data for 200 individuals 
from 12 Mozambican and 3 Angolan populations using ∼1.9 million autosomal single 
nucleotide polymorphisms. Incorporating a wide range of available genetic data, 
our analyses confirm previous results favoring a "late split" between West and 
East Bantu speakers, following a joint passage through the rainforest. In 
addition, we find that Bantu speakers from eastern Africa display genetic 
substructure, with Mozambican populations forming a gradient of relatedness 
along a North-South cline stretching from the coastal border between Kenya and 
Tanzania to South Africa. This gradient is further associated with a southward 
increase in genetic homogeneity, and involved minimum admixture with resident 
populations. Together, our results provide the first genetic evidence in support 
of a rapid North-South dispersal of Bantu peoples along the Indian Ocean Coast, 
as inferred from the distribution and antiquity of Early Iron Age assemblages 
associated with the Kwale archaeological tradition.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz224
PMCID: PMC6993857
PMID: 31593238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1455. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):455-468. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz229.

Parallel Concerted Evolution of Ribosomal Protein Genes in Fungi and Its 
Adaptive Significance.

Mullis A(1), Lu Z(1), Zhan Y(1), Wang TY(2), Rodriguez J(3), Rajeh A(1)(3), 
Chatrath A(1), Lin Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO.
(2)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Program of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Saint Louis University, 
St. Louis, MO.

Ribosomal protein (RP) genes encode structural components of ribosomes, the 
cellular machinery for protein synthesis. A single functional copy has been 
maintained in most of 78-80 RP families in animals due to evolutionary 
constraints imposed by gene dosage balance. Some fungal species have maintained 
duplicate copies in most RP families. The mechanisms by which the RP genes were 
duplicated and maintained and their functional significance are poorly 
understood. To address these questions, we identified all RP genes from 295 
fungi and inferred the timing and nature of gene duplication events for all RP 
families. We found that massive duplications of RP genes have independently 
occurred by different mechanisms in three distantly related lineages: budding 
yeasts, fission yeasts, and Mucoromycota. The RP gene duplicates in budding 
yeasts and Mucoromycota were mainly created by whole genome duplication events. 
However, duplicate RP genes in fission yeasts were likely generated by 
retroposition, which is unexpected considering their dosage sensitivity. The 
sequences of most RP paralogs have been homogenized by repeated gene conversion 
in each species, demonstrating parallel concerted evolution, which might have 
facilitated the retention of their duplicates. Transcriptomic data suggest that 
the duplication and retention of RP genes increased their transcript abundance. 
Physiological data indicate that increased ribosome biogenesis allowed these 
organisms to rapidly consume sugars through fermentation while maintaining high 
growth rates, providing selective advantages to these species in sugar-rich 
environments.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz229
PMCID: PMC6993855
PMID: 31589316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1456. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):417-428. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz225.

Fine-Scale Haplotype Structure Reveals Strong Signatures of Positive Selection 
in a Recombining Bacterial Pathogen.

Arnold B(1)(2), Sohail M(3)(4), Wadsworth C(5), Corander J(6)(7), Hanage WP(2), 
Sunyaev S(3)(4), Grad YH(5)(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Informatics, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.
(2)Center for Communicable Disease Dynamics, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public 
Health, Boston, MA.
(3)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(5)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, MA.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Computer Science, Helsinki Institute for Information Technology 
HIIT, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA.

Identifying genetic variation in bacteria that has been shaped by ecological 
differences remains an important challenge. For recombining bacteria, the sign 
and strength of linkage provide a unique lens into ongoing selection. We show 
that derived alleles <300 bp apart in Neisseria gonorrhoeae exhibit more 
coupling linkage than repulsion linkage, a pattern that cannot be explained by 
limited recombination or neutrality as these couplings are significantly 
stronger for nonsynonymous alleles than synonymous alleles. This general pattern 
is driven by a small fraction of highly diverse genes, many of which exhibit 
evidence of interspecies horizontal gene transfer and an excess of intermediate 
frequency alleles. Extensive simulations show that two distinct forms of 
positive selection can create these patterns of genetic variation: directional 
selection on horizontally transferred alleles or balancing selection that 
maintains distinct haplotypes in the presence of recombination. Our results 
establish a framework for identifying patterns of selection in fine-scale 
haplotype structure that indicate specific ecological processes in species that 
recombine with distantly related lineages or possess coexisting adaptive 
haplotypes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz225
PMCID: PMC6993868
PMID: 31589312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1457. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):379-394. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz222.

The Evolutionary History of Ephs and Ephrins: Toward Multicellular Organisms.

Arcas A(1), Wilkinson DG(2), Nieto MÁ(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias (CSIC-UMH), Avda, San Juan de Alicante, Spain.
(2)Neural Development Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United 
Kingdom.

Eph receptor (Eph) and ephrin signaling regulate fundamental developmental 
processes through both forward and reverse signaling triggered upon cell-cell 
contact. In vertebrates, they are both classified into classes A and B, and some 
representatives have been identified in many metazoan groups, where their 
expression and functions have been well studied. We have extended previous 
phylogenetic analyses and examined the presence of Eph and ephrins in the tree 
of life to determine their origin and evolution. We have found that 1) 
premetazoan choanoflagellates may already have rudimental Eph/ephrin signaling 
as they have an Eph-/ephrin-like pair and homologs of downstream-signaling 
genes; 2) both forward- and reverse-downstream signaling might already occur in 
Porifera since sponges have most genes involved in these types of signaling; 3) 
the nonvertebrate metazoan Eph is a type-B receptor that can bind ephrins 
regardless of their membrane-anchoring structure, glycosylphosphatidylinositol, 
or transmembrane; 4) Eph/ephrin cross-class binding is specific to 
Gnathostomata; and 5) kinase-dead Eph receptors can be traced back to 
Gnathostomata. We conclude that Eph/ephrin signaling is of older origin than 
previously believed. We also examined the presence of protein domains associated 
with functional characteristics and the appearance and conservation of 
downstream-signaling pathways to understand the original and derived functions 
of Ephs and ephrins. We find that the evolutionary history of these gene 
families points to an ancestral function in cell-cell interactions that could 
contribute to the emergence of multicellularity and, in particular, to the 
required segregation of cell populations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz222
PMCID: PMC6993872
PMID: 31589243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1458. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2925-2926. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz163.

All Ears: Genetic Bases of Mammalian Inner Ear Evolution.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1653-1670.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz163
PMID: 31584663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1459. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2462. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz230.

Editor's Note: Molecular evolution of auxin-mediated root initiation in plants.

Yu J, Zhang Y, Liu W, Wang H, Wen S, Zhang Y, Xu L.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1387-1393.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz230
PMID: 31584657


1460. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2926-2927. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz165.

Sea Otters Shown to Have Low Genetic Diversity.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz165
PMID: 31584653


1461. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):365-378. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz221.

Additional Layer of Regulation via Convergent Gene Orientation in Yeasts.

Gilet J(1)(2), Conte R(1)(2), Torchet C(2), Benard L(2), Lafontaine I(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR7141 Laboratoire de Biologie du 
Chloroplaste et Perception de la Lumière chez les Microalgues, CNRS, Sorbonne 
Université, Paris, France.
(2)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, 
Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire des Eucaryotes, Paris, France.
(3)Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, FRC 550, CNRS, Paris, France.

Convergent gene pairs can produce transcripts with complementary sequences. We 
had shown that mRNA duplexes form in vivo in Saccharomyces cerevisiae via 
interactions of mRNA overlapping 3'-ends and can lead to posttranscriptional 
regulatory events. Here we show that mRNA duplex formation is restricted to 
convergent genes separated by short intergenic distance, independently of their 
3'-untranslated region (UTR) length. We disclose an enrichment in genes involved 
in biological processes related to stress among these convergent genes. They are 
markedly conserved in convergent orientation in budding yeasts, meaning that 
this mode of posttranscriptional regulation could be shared in these organisms, 
conferring an additional level for modulating stress response. We thus 
investigated the mechanistic advantages potentially conferred by 3'-UTR mRNA 
interactions. Analysis of genome-wide transcriptome data revealed that Pat1 and 
Lsm1 factors, having 3'-UTR binding preference and participating to the 
remodeling of messenger ribonucleoprotein particles, bind differently these 
messenger-interacting mRNAs forming duplexes in comparison to mRNAs that do not 
interact (solo mRNAs). Functionally, messenger-interacting mRNAs show limited 
translational repression upon stress. We thus propose that mRNA duplex formation 
modulates the regulation of mRNA expression by limiting their access to 
translational repressors. Our results thus show that posttranscriptional 
regulation is an additional factor that determines the order of coding genes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz221
PMCID: PMC6993858
PMID: 31580446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1462. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):355-364. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz220.

Population Genetics and Molecular Evolution of DNA Sequences in Transposable 
Elements. II. Accumulation of Variation and Evolution of a New Subfamily.

Iwasaki WM(1), Kijima TE(1), Innan H(1).

Author information:
(1)SOKENDAI, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies, Hayama, Kanagawa, 
Japan.

In order to understand how DNA sequences of transposable elements (TEs) evolve, 
extensive simulations were carried out. We first used our previous model, in 
which the copy number of TEs is mainly controlled by selection against ectopic 
recombination. It was found that along a simulation run, the shape of phylogeny 
changes quite much, from monophyletic trees to dimorphic trees with two 
clusters. Our results demonstrated that the change of the phase is usually slow 
from a monomorphic phase to a dimorphic phase, accompanied with a growth of an 
internal branch by accumulation of variation between two types. Then, the phase 
immediately changes back to a monomorphic phase when one group gets extinct. 
Under this condition, monomorphic and dimorphic phases arise repeatedly, and it 
is very difficult to maintain two or more different types of TEs for a long 
time. Then, how a new subfamily can evolve? To solve this, we developed a new 
model, in which ectopic recombination is restricted between two types under some 
condition, for example, accumulation of mutations between them. Under this 
model, because selection works on the copy number of each types separately, two 
types can be maintained for a long time. As expected, our simulations 
demonstrated that a new type arises and persists quite stably, and that it will 
be recognized as a new subfamily followed by further accumulation of mutations. 
It is indicated that how ectopic recombination is regulated in a genome is an 
important factor for the evolution of a new subfamily.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz220
PMID: 31580443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1463. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):18-30. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz176.

Discovery of Novel Sequences in 1,000 Swedish Genomes.

Eisfeldt J(1)(2)(3), Mårtensson G(4), Ameur A(5), Nilsson D(1)(2)(3), Lindstrand 
A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet Science Park, Solna, 
Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Division of Nanobiotechnology, Department of Protein Science, Science for 
Life Laboratory, School of Engineering Sciences in Chemistry, Biotechnology and 
Health, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and 
Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):306.

Novel sequences (NSs), not present in the human reference genome, are abundant 
and remain largely unexplored. Here, we utilize de novo assembly to study NS in 
1,000 Swedish individuals first sequenced as part of the SweGen project 
revealing a total of 46 Mb in 61,044 distinct contigs of sequences not present 
in GRCh38. The contigs were aligned to recently published catalogs of Icelandic 
and Pan-African NSs, as well as the chimpanzee genome, revealing a great 
diversity of shared sequences. Analyzing the positioning of NS across the 
chimpanzee genome, we find that 2,807 NS align confidently within 143 chimpanzee 
orthologs of human genes. Aligning the whole genome sequencing data to the 
chimpanzee genome, we discover ancestral NS common throughout the Swedish 
population. The NSs were searched for repeats and repeat elements: revealing a 
majority of repetitive sequence (56%), and enrichment of simple repeats (28%) 
and satellites (15%). Lastly, we align the unmappable reads of a subset of the 
thousand genomes data to our collection of NS, as well as the previously 
published Pan-African NS: revealing that both the Swedish and Pan-African NS are 
widespread, and that the Swedish NSs are largely a subset of the Pan-African NS. 
Overall, these results highlight the importance of creating a more diverse 
reference genome and illustrate that significant amounts of the NS may be of 
ancestral origin.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz176
PMCID: PMC6984370
PMID: 31560401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1464. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):341-354. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz218.

Tolerance to Selenoprotein Loss Differs between Human and Mouse.

Santesmasses D(1), Mariotti M(1), Gladyshev VN(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.

Mouse has emerged as the most common model organism in biomedicine. Here, we 
analyzed the tolerance to the loss-of-function (LoF) of selenoprotein genes, 
estimated from mouse knockouts and the frequency of LoF variants in humans. We 
found not only a general correspondence in tolerance (e.g., GPX1, GPX2) and 
intolerance (TXNRD1, SELENOT) to gene LoF between humans and mice but also 
important differences. Notably, humans are intolerant to the loss of 
iodothyronine deiodinases, whereas their deletion in mice leads to mild 
phenotypes, and this is consistent with phenotype differences in selenocysteine 
machinery loss between these species. In contrast, loss of TXNRD2 and GPX4 is 
lethal in mice but may be tolerated in humans. We further identified the first 
human SELENOP variants coding for proteins varying in selenocysteine content. 
Finally, our analyses suggested that premature termination codons in 
selenoprotein genes trigger nonsense-mediated decay, but do this inefficiently 
when UGA codon is gained. Overall, our study highlights differences in the 
physiological importance of selenoproteins between human and mouse.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz218
PMCID: PMC6993852
PMID: 31560400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1465. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):208-220. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz215.

Patterns of Genomic Differentiation in the Drosophila nasuta Species Complex.

Mai D(1), Nalley MJ(1), Bachtrog D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.

The Drosophila nasuta species complex contains over a dozen recently diverged 
species that are distributed widely across South-East Asia, and which shows 
varying degrees of pre- and postzygotic isolation. Here, we assemble a 
high-quality genome for D. albomicans using single-molecule sequencing and 
chromatin conformation capture, and draft genomes for 11 additional species and 
67 individuals across the clade, to infer the species phylogeny and patterns of 
genetic diversity in this group. Our assembly recovers entire chromosomes, and 
we date the origin of this radiation ∼2 Ma. Despite low levels of overall 
differentiation, most species or subspecies show clear clustering into their 
designated taxonomic groups using population genetics and phylogenetic methods. 
Local evolutionary history is heterogeneous across the genome, and differs 
between the autosomes and the X chromosome for species in the sulfurigaster 
subgroup, likely due to autosomal introgression. Our study establishes the 
nasuta species complex as a promising model system to further characterize the 
evolution of pre- and postzygotic isolation in this clade.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz215
PMCID: PMC6984368
PMID: 31556453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1466. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):149-166. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz209.

"Lost and Found": snoRNA Annotation in the Xenopus Genome and Implications for 
Evolutionary Studies.

Deryusheva S(1), Talhouarne GJS(1), Gall JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Embryology, Carnegie Institution for Science, Baltimore, MD.

Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) function primarily as guide RNAs for 
posttranscriptional modification of rRNAs and spliceosomal snRNAs, both of which 
are functionally important and evolutionarily conserved molecules. It is 
commonly believed that snoRNAs and the modifications they mediate are highly 
conserved across species. However, most relevant data on snoRNA annotation and 
RNA modification are limited to studies on human and yeast. Here, we used 
RNA-sequencing data from the giant oocyte nucleus of the frog Xenopus tropicalis 
to annotate a nearly complete set of snoRNAs. We compared the frog data with 
snoRNA sets from human and other vertebrate genomes, including mammals, birds, 
reptiles, and fish. We identified many Xenopus-specific (or nonhuman) snoRNAs 
and Xenopus-specific domains in snoRNAs from conserved RNA families. We 
predicted that some of these nonhuman snoRNAs and domains mediate modifications 
at unexpected positions in rRNAs and snRNAs. These modifications were mapped as 
predicted when RNA modification assays were applied to RNA from nine vertebrate 
species: frogs X. tropicalis and X. laevis, newt Notophthalmus viridescens, 
axolotl Ambystoma mexicanum, whiptail lizard Aspidoscelis neomexicana, zebrafish 
Danio rerio, chicken, mouse, and human. This analysis revealed that only a 
subset of RNA modifications is evolutionarily conserved and that modification 
patterns may vary even between closely related species. We speculate that each 
functional domain in snoRNAs (half of an snoRNA) may evolve independently and 
shuffle between different snoRNAs.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz209
PMCID: PMC6984369
PMID: 31553476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1467. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):221-239. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz216.

Stress-Driven Transposable Element De-repression Dynamics and Virulence 
Evolution in a Fungal Pathogen.

Fouché S(1)(2), Badet T(2), Oggenfuss U(2), Plissonneau C(1), Francisco CS(1), 
Croll D(2).

Author information:
(1)Plant Pathology, Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics, Institute of Biology, University of 
Neuchâtel, Neuchâtel, Switzerland.

Transposable elements (TEs) are drivers of genome evolution and affect the 
expression landscape of the host genome. Stress is a major factor inducing TE 
activity; however, the regulatory mechanisms underlying de-repression are poorly 
understood. Plant pathogens are excellent models to dissect the impact of stress 
on TEs. The process of plant infection induces stress for the pathogen, and 
virulence factors (i.e., effectors) located in TE-rich regions become expressed. 
To dissect TE de-repression dynamics and contributions to virulence, we analyzed 
the TE expression landscape of four strains of the major wheat pathogen 
Zymoseptoria tritici. We experimentally exposed strains to nutrient starvation 
and host infection stress. Contrary to expectations, we show that the two 
distinct conditions induce the expression of different sets of TEs. In 
particular, the most highly expressed TEs, including miniature inverted-repeat 
transposable element and long terminal repeat-Gypsy element, show highly 
distinct de-repression across stress conditions. Both the genomic context of TEs 
and the genetic background stress (i.e., different strains harboring the same 
TEs) were major predictors of de-repression under stress. Gene expression 
profiles under stress varied significantly depending on the proximity to the 
closest TEs and genomic defenses against TEs were largely ineffective to prevent 
de-repression. Next, we analyzed the locus encoding the Avr3D1 effector. We show 
that the insertion and subsequent silencing of TEs in close proximity likely 
contributed to reduced expression and virulence on a specific wheat cultivar. 
The complexity of TE responsiveness to stress across genetic backgrounds and 
genomic locations demonstrates substantial intraspecific genetic variation to 
control TEs with consequences for virulence.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz216
PMID: 31553475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1468. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):327-340. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz217.

The Universally Conserved Residues Are Not Universally Required for Stable 
Protein Expression or Functions of Cryptochromes.

Liu H(1)(2), Su T(1)(3), He W(1)(4), Wang Q(3), Lin C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell & Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(2)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(3)UCLA-FAFU Joint Research Center on Plant Proteomics, Basic Forestry and 
Proteomics Research Center, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou, 
China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou, China.

Universally conserved residues (UCRs) are invariable amino acids evolutionarily 
conserved among members of a protein family across diverse kingdoms of life. 
UCRs are considered important for stability and/or function of protein families, 
but it has not been experimentally examined systematically. Cryptochromes are 
photoreceptors in plants or light-independent components of the circadian clocks 
in mammals. We experimentally analyzed 51 UCRs of Arabidopsis cryptochrome 2 
(CRY2) that are universally conserved in eukaryotic cryptochromes from 
Arabidopsis to human. Surprisingly, we found that UCRs required for stable 
protein expression of CRY2 in plants are not similarly required for stable 
protein expression of human hCRY1 in human cells. Moreover, 74% of the stably 
expressed CRY2 proteins mutated in UCRs retained wild-type-like activities for 
at least one photoresponses analyzed. Our finding suggests that the evolutionary 
mechanisms underlying conservation of UCRs or that distinguish UCRs from 
non-UCRs determining the same functions of individual cryptochromes remain to be 
investigated.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz217
PMCID: PMC8204711
PMID: 31550045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1469. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):240-259. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz212.

Comparative Transcriptomics Analyses across Species, Organs, and Developmental 
Stages Reveal Functionally Constrained lncRNAs.

Darbellay F(1), Necsulea A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive, CNRS UMR 5558, Université de 
Lyon, Université Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France.

The functionality of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) is disputed. In general, 
lncRNAs are under weak selective pressures, suggesting that the majority of 
lncRNAs may be nonfunctional. However, although some surveys showed negligible 
phenotypic effects upon lncRNA perturbation, key biological roles were 
demonstrated for individual lncRNAs. Most lncRNAs with proven functions were 
implicated in gene expression regulation, in pathways related to cellular 
pluripotency, differentiation, and organ morphogenesis, suggesting that 
functional lncRNAs may be more abundant in embryonic development, rather than in 
adult organs. To test this hypothesis, we perform a multidimensional comparative 
transcriptomics analysis, across five developmental time points (two embryonic 
stages, newborn, adult, and aged individuals), four organs (brain, kidney, 
liver, and testes), and three species (mouse, rat, and chicken). We find that, 
overwhelmingly, lncRNAs are preferentially expressed in adult and aged testes, 
consistent with the presence of permissive transcription during spermatogenesis. 
LncRNAs are often differentially expressed among developmental stages and are 
less abundant in embryos and newborns compared with adult individuals, in 
agreement with a requirement for tighter expression control and less tolerance 
for noisy transcription early in development. For differentially expressed 
lncRNAs, we find that the patterns of expression variation among developmental 
stages are generally conserved between mouse and rat. Moreover, lncRNAs 
expressed above noise levels in somatic organs and during development show 
higher evolutionary conservation, in particular, at their promoter regions. 
Thus, we show that functionally constrained lncRNA loci are enriched in 
developing organs, and we suggest that many of these loci may function in an 
RNA-independent manner.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz212
PMCID: PMC6984365
PMID: 31539080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1470. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):195-207. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz214.

The Genetic Background Modulates the Evolution of Fluoroquinolone-Resistance in 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Castro RAD(1)(2), Ross A(1)(2), Kamwela L(1)(2), Reinhard M(1)(2), Loiseau 
C(1)(2), Feldmann J(1)(2), Borrell S(1)(2), Trauner A(1)(2), Gagneux S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Fluoroquinolones (FQ) form the backbone in experimental treatment regimens 
against drug-susceptible tuberculosis. However, little is known on whether the 
genetic variation present in natural populations of Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
(Mtb) affects the evolution of FQ-resistance (FQ-R). To investigate this 
question, we used nine genetically distinct drug-susceptible clinical isolates 
of Mtb and measured their frequency of resistance to the FQ ofloxacin (OFX) in 
vitro. We found that the Mtb genetic background led to differences in the 
frequency of OFX-resistance (OFX-R) that spanned two orders of magnitude and 
substantially modulated the observed mutational profiles for OFX-R. Further, in 
vitro assays showed that the genetic background also influenced the minimum 
inhibitory concentration and the fitness effect conferred by a given OFX-R 
mutation. To test the clinical relevance of our in vitro work, we surveyed the 
mutational profile for FQ-R in publicly available genomic sequences from 
clinical Mtb isolates, and found substantial Mtb lineage-dependent variability. 
Comparison of the clinical and the in vitro mutational profiles for FQ-R showed 
that 51% and 39% of the variability in the clinical frequency of FQ-R gyrA 
mutation events in Lineage 2 and Lineage 4 strains, respectively, can be 
attributed to how Mtb evolves FQ-R in vitro. As the Mtb genetic background 
strongly influenced the evolution of FQ-R in vitro, we conclude that the genetic 
background of Mtb also impacts the evolution of FQ-R in the clinic.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz214
PMCID: PMC6984360
PMID: 31532481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1471. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):183-194. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz213.

The Genome of the Endangered Dryas Monkey Provides New Insights into the 
Evolutionary History of the Vervets.

van der Valk T(1), Gonda CM(1), Silegowa H(2), Almanza S(3), Sifuentes-Romero 
I(4), Hart TB(2), Hart JA(2), Detwiler KM(3)(4), Guschanski K(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Ecology, Department of Ecology and Genetics, Evolutionary Biology 
Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Frankfurt Zoological Society, TL2 Project, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
the Congo.
(3)Department of Anthropology, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, 
FL.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jun 1;37(6):1843.

Genomic data can be a powerful tool for inferring ecology, behavior, and 
conservation needs of highly elusive species, particularly, when other sources 
of information are hard to come by. Here, we focus on the Dryas monkey 
(Cercopithecus dryas), an endangered primate endemic to the Congo Basin with 
cryptic behavior and possibly <250 remaining adult individuals. Using 
whole-genome sequencing data, we show that the Dryas monkey represents a sister 
lineage to the vervets (Chlorocebus sp.) and has diverged from them ∼1.4 Ma with 
additional bidirectional gene flow ∼750,000-∼500,000 years ago that has likely 
involved the crossing of the Congo River. Together with evidence of gene flow 
across the Congo River in bonobos and okapis, our results suggest that the 
fluvial topology of the Congo River might have been more dynamic than previously 
recognized. Despite the presence of several homozygous loss-of-function 
mutations in genes associated with sperm mobility and immunity, we find high 
genetic diversity and low levels of inbreeding and genetic load in the studied 
Dryas monkey individual. This suggests that the current population carries 
sufficient genetic variability for long-term survival and might be larger than 
currently recognized. We thus provide an example of how genomic data can 
directly improve our understanding of highly elusive species.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz213
PMCID: PMC6984364
PMID: 31529046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1472. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):167-182. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz211.

Recombining Your Way Out of Trouble: The Genetic Architecture of Hybrid Fitness 
under Environmental Stress.

Zhang Z(1), Bendixsen DP(1), Janzen T(2)(3), Nolte AW(2)(3), Greig D(2)(4), 
Stelkens R(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Population Genetics, Department of Zoology, Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(3)Institute of Biology and Environmental Sciences, University of Oldenburg, 
Oldenburg, Germany.
(4)Centre for Life's Origins and Evolution (CLOE), Department of Genetics, 
Evolution, and Environment, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Hybridization between species can either promote or impede adaptation. But we 
know very little about the genetic basis of hybrid fitness, especially in 
nondomesticated organisms, and when populations are facing environmental stress. 
We made genetically variable F2 hybrid populations from two divergent 
Saccharomyces yeast species. We exposed populations to ten toxins and sequenced 
the most resilient hybrids on low coverage using ddRADseq to investigate four 
aspects of their genomes: 1) hybridity, 2) interspecific heterozygosity, 3) 
epistasis (positive or negative associations between nonhomologous chromosomes), 
and 4) ploidy. We used linear mixed-effect models and simulations to measure to 
which extent hybrid genome composition was contingent on the environment. 
Genomes grown in different environments varied in every aspect of hybridness 
measured, revealing strong genotype-environment interactions. We also found 
selection against heterozygosity or directional selection for one of the 
parental alleles, with larger fitness of genomes carrying more homozygous 
allelic combinations in an otherwise hybrid genomic background. In addition, 
individual chromosomes and chromosomal interactions showed significant species 
biases and pervasive aneuploidies. Against our expectations, we observed 
multiple beneficial, opposite-species chromosome associations, confirmed by 
epistasis- and selection-free computer simulations, which is surprising given 
the large divergence of parental genomes (∼15%). Together, these results suggest 
that successful, stress-resilient hybrid genomes can be assembled from the best 
features of both parents without paying high costs of negative epistasis. This 
illustrates the importance of measuring genetic trait architecture in an 
environmental context when determining the evolutionary potential of genetically 
diverse hybrid populations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz211
PMCID: PMC6984367
PMID: 31518427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1473. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2656-2667. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz196.

Disappearance of Icelandic Walruses Coincided with Norse Settlement.

Keighley X(1)(2)(3), Pálsson S(4), Einarsson BF(5), Petersen A(6), 
Fernández-Coll M(4)(7), Jordan P(3), Olsen MT(1)(2), Malmquist HJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Section for Evolutionary Genomics, GLOBE Institute, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(3)Arctic Centre and Groningen Institute of Archaeology, University of 
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, 
Iceland.
(5)The Archaeological Office, Reykjavík, Iceland.
(6)Reykjavík, Iceland.
(7)Icelandic Museum of Natural History, Reykjavík, Iceland.

There is a growing body of evidence demonstrating the impacts of human arrival 
in new "pristine" environments, including terrestrial habitat alterations and 
species extinctions. However, the effects of marine resource utilization prior 
to industrialized whaling, sealing, and fishing have largely remained 
understudied. The expansion of the Norse across the North Atlantic offers a rare 
opportunity to study the effects of human arrival and early exploitation of 
marine resources. Today, there is no local population of walruses on Iceland, 
however, skeletal remains, place names, and written sources suggest that 
walruses existed, and were hunted by the Norse during the Settlement and 
Commonwealth periods (870-1262 AD). This study investigates the timing, 
geographic distribution, and genetic identity of walruses in Iceland by 
combining historical information, place names, radiocarbon dating, and genomic 
analyses. The results support a genetically distinct, local population of 
walruses that went extinct shortly after Norse settlement. The high value of 
walrus products such as ivory on international markets likely led to intense 
hunting pressure, which-potentially exacerbated by a warming climate and 
volcanism-resulted in the extinction of walrus on Iceland. We show that 
commercial hunting, economic incentives, and trade networks as early as the 
Viking Age were of sufficient scale and intensity to result in significant, 
irreversible ecological impacts on the marine environment. This is to one of the 
earliest examples of local extinction of a marine species following human 
arrival, during the very beginning of commercial marine exploitation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz196
PMCID: PMC6878957
PMID: 31513267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1474. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2629. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz162.

Scientists Explore Diversity of Han Chinese.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz162
PMID: 31512727


1475. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2630. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz164.

Scientists Crack Origin of the Persian Walnut.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz164
PMID: 31512723


1476. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):2-10. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz201.

Legacy Data Confound Genomics Studies.

Anderson-Trocmé L(1)(2), Farouni R(1)(2), Bourgey M(1)(2), Kamatani Y(3), Higasa 
K(3), Seo JS(4)(5), Kim C(4), Matsuda F(3), Gravel S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Center for Genomic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Bioinformatics Institute, Macrogen Inc, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Precision Medicine Center, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Republic of Korea.

Recent reports have identified differences in the mutational spectra across 
human populations. Although some of these reports have been replicated in other 
cohorts, most have been reported only in the 1000 Genomes Project (1kGP) data. 
While investigating an intriguing putative population stratification within the 
Japanese population, we identified a previously unreported batch effect leading 
to spurious mutation calls in the 1kGP data and to the apparent population 
stratification. Because the 1kGP data are used extensively, we find that the 
batch effects also lead to incorrect imputation by leading imputation servers 
and a small number of suspicious GWAS associations. Lower quality data from the 
early phases of the 1kGP thus continue to contaminate modern studies in hidden 
ways. It may be time to retire or upgrade such legacy sequencing data.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz201
PMID: 31504792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1477. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):260-279. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz203.

Polymorphism Data Assist Estimation of the Nonsynonymous over Synonymous 
Fixation Rate Ratio ω for Closely Related Species.

Mugal CF(1), Kutschera VE(1)(2)(3), Botero-Castro F(4), Wolf JBW(1)(4), Kaj 
I(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(4)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, LMU Munich, 
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(5)Department of Mathematics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

The ratio of nonsynonymous over synonymous sequence divergence, dN/dS, is a 
widely used estimate of the nonsynonymous over synonymous fixation rate ratio ω, 
which measures the extent to which natural selection modulates protein sequence 
evolution. Its computation is based on a phylogenetic approach and computes 
sequence divergence of protein-coding DNA between species, traditionally using a 
single representative DNA sequence per species. This approach ignores the 
presence of polymorphisms and relies on the indirect assumption that new 
mutations fix instantaneously, an assumption which is generally violated and 
reasonable only for distantly related species. The violation of the underlying 
assumption leads to a time-dependence of sequence divergence, and biased 
estimates of ω in particular for closely related species, where the contribution 
of ancestral and lineage-specific polymorphisms to sequence divergence is 
substantial. We here use a time-dependent Poisson random field model to derive 
an analytical expression of dN/dS as a function of divergence time and sample 
size. We then extend our framework to the estimation of the proportion of 
adaptive protein evolution α. This mathematical treatment enables us to show 
that the joint usage of polymorphism and divergence data can assist the 
inference of selection for closely related species. Moreover, our analytical 
results provide the basis for a protocol for the estimation of ω and α for 
closely related species. We illustrate the performance of this protocol by 
studying a population data set of four corvid species, which involves the 
estimation of ω and α at different time-scales and for several choices of sample 
sizes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz203
PMCID: PMC6984366
PMID: 31504782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1478. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):100-109. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz205.

Evolutionary History of GLIS Genes Illuminates Their Roles in Cell Reprograming 
and Ciliogenesis.

Yasuoka Y(1), Matsumoto M(1)(2)(3)(4), Yagi K(1), Okazaki Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Comprehensive Genomic Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative 
Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(2)Diagnostics and Therapeutics of Intractable Diseases, Intractable Disease 
Research Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Advanced Diabetic Therapeutics, Department of Metabolic Endocrinology, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Biofunction Research, Institute of Biomaterials and 
Bioengineering, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

The GLIS family transcription factors, GLIS1 and GLIS3, potentiate generation of 
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). In contrast, another GLIS family member, 
GLIS2, suppresses cell reprograming. To understand how these disparate roles 
arose, we examined evolutionary origins and genomic organization of GLIS genes. 
Comprehensive phylogenetic analysis shows that GLIS1 and GLIS3 originated during 
vertebrate whole genome duplication, whereas GLIS2 is a sister group to the 
GLIS1/3 and GLI families. This result is consistent with their opposing 
functions in cell reprograming. Glis1 evolved faster than Glis3, losing many 
protein-interacting motifs. This suggests that Glis1 acquired new functions 
under weakened evolutionary constraints. In fact, GLIS1 induces induced 
pluripotent stem cells more strongly. Transcriptomic data from various animal 
embryos demonstrate that glis1 is maternally expressed in some tetrapods, 
whereas vertebrate glis3 and invertebrate glis1/3 genes are rarely expressed in 
oocytes, suggesting that vertebrate (or tetrapod) Glis1 acquired a new 
expression domain and function as a maternal factor. Furthermore, comparative 
genomic analysis reveals that glis1/3 is part of a bilaterian-specific gene 
cluster, together with rfx3, ndc1, hspb11, and lrrc42. Because known functions 
of these genes are related to cilia formation and function, the last common 
ancestor of bilaterians may have acquired this cluster by shuffling gene order 
to establish more sophisticated epithelial tissues involving cilia. This 
evolutionary study highlights the significance of GLIS1/3 for cell reprograming, 
development, and diseases in ciliated organs such as lung, kidney, and pancreas.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz205
PMCID: PMC6984359
PMID: 31504761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1479. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2778-2789. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz186.

Unusual Patterns of Mitochondrial Inheritance in the Brown Alga Ectocarpus.

Mignerot L(1), Nagasato C(2), Peters AF(3), Perrineau MM(1)(4), Scornet D(1), 
Pontheaux F(1), Djema W(5), Badis Y(1)(4), Motomura T(2), Coelho SM(1), Cock 
JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, Algal Genetics Group, UMR 8227 Integrative Biology 
of Marine Models (LBI2M), Station Biologique de Roscoff (SBR), Roscoff, France.
(2)Muroran Marine Station, Hokkaido University, Japan.
(3)Bezhin Rosko, Santec, France.
(4)The Scottish Association for Marine Science, Scottish Marine Institute, Oban, 
Argyll, Scotland.
(5)Inria Sophia-Antipolis, Côte d'Azur University, Bicore and McTAO Teams, 
France.

Most eukaryotes inherit their mitochondria from only one of their parents. When 
there are different sexes, it is almost always the maternal mitochondria that 
are transmitted. Indeed, maternal uniparental inheritance has been reported for 
the brown alga Ectocarpus but we show in this study that different strains of 
Ectocarpus can exhibit different patterns of inheritance: Ectocarpus siliculosus 
strains showed maternal uniparental inheritance, as expected, but crosses using 
different Ectocarpus species 7 strains exhibited either paternal uniparental 
inheritance or an unusual pattern of transmission where progeny inherited either 
maternal or paternal mitochondria, but not both. A possible correlation between 
the pattern of mitochondrial inheritance and male gamete parthenogenesis was 
investigated. Moreover, in contrast to observations in the green lineage, we did 
not detect any change in the pattern of mitochondrial inheritance in mutant 
strains affected in life cycle progression. Finally, an analysis of 
field-isolated strains provided evidence of mitochondrial genome recombination 
in both Ectocarpus species.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz186
PMID: 31504759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1480. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):58-70. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz199.

Stochastic Gene Expression Influences the Selection of Antibiotic Resistance 
Mutations.

Sun L(1), Ashcroft P(1), Ackermann M(2)(3), Bonhoeffer S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Biogeochemistry and Pollutant Dynamics, ETH Zürich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Environmental Microbiology, EAWAG, Swiss Federal Institute of 
Aquatic Science and Technology, Dübendorf, Switzerland.

Bacteria can resist antibiotics by expressing enzymes that remove or deactivate 
drug molecules. Here, we study the effects of gene expression stochasticity on 
efflux and enzymatic resistance. We construct an agent-based model that 
stochastically simulates multiple biochemical processes in the cell and we 
observe the growth and survival dynamics of the cell population. 
Resistance-enhancing mutations are introduced by varying parameters that control 
the enzyme expression or efficacy. We find that stochastic gene expression can 
cause complex dynamics in terms of survival and extinction for these mutants. 
Regulatory mutations, which augment the frequency and duration of resistance 
gene transcription, can provide limited resistance by increasing mean 
expression. Structural mutations, which modify the enzyme or efflux efficacy, 
provide most resistance by improving the binding affinity of the resistance 
protein to the antibiotic; increasing the enzyme's catalytic rate alone may 
contribute to resistance if drug binding is not rate limiting. Overall, we 
identify conditions where regulatory mutations are selected over structural 
mutations, and vice versa. Our findings show that stochastic gene expression is 
a key factor underlying efflux and enzymatic resistances and should be taken 
into consideration in future antibiotic research.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz199
PMCID: PMC6984361
PMID: 31504754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1481. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2842-2853. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz194.

Butterfly Mimicry Polymorphisms Highlight Phylogenetic Limits of Gene Reuse in 
the Evolution of Diverse Adaptations.

VanKuren NW(1), Massardo D(1), Nallu S(1), Kronforst MR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology & Evolution, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Some genes have repeatedly been found to control diverse adaptations in a wide 
variety of organisms. Such gene reuse reveals not only the diversity of 
phenotypes these unique genes control but also the composition of developmental 
gene networks and the genetic routes available to and taken by organisms during 
adaptation. However, the causes of gene reuse remain unclear. A small number of 
large-effect Mendelian loci control a huge diversity of mimetic butterfly wing 
color patterns, but reasons for their reuse are difficult to identify because 
the genetic basis of mimicry has primarily been studied in two systems with 
correlated factors: female-limited Batesian mimicry in Papilio swallowtails 
(Papilionidae) and non-sex-limited Müllerian mimicry in Heliconius longwings 
(Nymphalidae). Here, we break the correlation between phylogenetic relationship 
and sex-limited mimicry by identifying loci controlling female-limited mimicry 
polymorphism Hypolimnas misippus (Nymphalidae) and non-sex-limited mimicry 
polymorphism in Papilio clytia (Papilionidae). The Papilio clytia polymorphism 
is controlled by the genome region containing the gene cortex, the classic P 
supergene in Heliconius numata, and loci controlling color pattern variation 
across Lepidoptera. In contrast, female-limited mimicry polymorphism in 
Hypolimnas misippus is associated with a locus not previously implicated in 
color patterning. Thus, although many species repeatedly converged on cortex and 
its neighboring genes over 120 My of evolution of diverse color patterns, 
female-limited mimicry polymorphisms each evolved using a different gene. Our 
results support conclusions that gene reuse occurs mainly within ∼10 My and 
highlight the puzzling diversity of genes controlling seemingly complex 
female-limited mimicry polymorphisms.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz194
PMCID: PMC7968384
PMID: 31504750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1482. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):295-299. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz197.

HyPhy 2.5-A Customizable Platform for Evolutionary Hypothesis Testing Using 
Phylogenies.

Kosakovsky Pond SL(1), Poon AFY(2), Velazquez R(1), Weaver S(1), Hepler NL(3), 
Murrell B(4), Shank SD(1), Magalis BR(1), Bouvier D(5), Nekrutenko A(5), 
Wisotsky S(1)(6), Spielman SJ(1)(7), Frost SDW(8)(9), Muse SV(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Genomics and Evolutionary Medicine, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(3)10× Genomics, Pleasanton, CA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, State 
College, PA.
(6)Department of Statistics and Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina 
State University, Raleigh, NC.
(7)Rowan University, Glassboro, NJ.
(8)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(9)The Alan Turing Institute, London, United Kingdom.

HYpothesis testing using PHYlogenies (HyPhy) is a scriptable, open-source 
package for fitting a broad range of evolutionary models to multiple sequence 
alignments, and for conducting subsequent parameter estimation and hypothesis 
testing, primarily in the maximum likelihood statistical framework. It has 
become a popular choice for characterizing various aspects of the evolutionary 
process: natural selection, evolutionary rates, recombination, and coevolution. 
The 2.5 release (available from www.hyphy.org) includes a completely 
re-engineered computational core and analysis library that introduces new 
classes of evolutionary models and statistical tests, delivers substantial 
performance and stability enhancements, improves usability, streamlines 
end-to-end analysis workflows, makes it easier to develop custom analyses, and 
is mostly backward compatible with previous HyPhy releases.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz197
PMCID: PMC8204705
PMID: 31504749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1483. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):44-57. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz198.

Ancient Mitochondrial Gene Transfer between Fungi and the Orchids.

Sinn BT(1)(2), Barrett CF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV.
(2)Department of Biology and Earth Science, Otterbein University, Westerville, 
OH.

The mitochondrial genomes (mitogenomes) of plants are known to incorporate and 
accumulate DNA from intra- and extracellular donors. Despite the intimate 
relationships formed between flowing plants (angiosperms) and fungi, lengthy 
fungal-like sequence has not been identified in angiosperm mitogenomes to date. 
Here, we present multiple lines of evidence documenting horizontal gene transfer 
(HGT) between the mitogenomes of fungi and the ancestors of the orchids, plants 
that are obligate parasites of fungi during their early development. We show 
that the ancestor of the orchids acquired an ∼270-bp fungal mitogenomic region 
containing three transfer RNA genes. We propose that the short HGT was later 
replaced by a second HGT event transferring >8 kb and 14 genes from a fungal 
mitogenome to that of the ancestor of the largest orchid subfamily, 
Epidendroideae. Our results represent the first evidence of genomic-scale HGT 
between fungal and angiosperm mitogenomes and demonstrate that the length 
intergenic spacer regions of angiosperm mitogenomes can effectively fossilize 
the genomic remains of ancient, nonplant organisms.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz198
PMID: 31504747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1484. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):31-43. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz195.

Phylogenetic Shifts in Gene Body Methylation Correlate with Gene Expression and 
Reflect Trait Conservation.

Seymour DK(1)(2), Gaut BS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA.
(2)Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, University of California, Riverside, 
Riverside, CA.

A subset of genes in plant genomes are labeled with DNA methylation specifically 
at CG residues. These genes, known as gene-body methylated (gbM), have a number 
of associated characteristics. They tend to have longer sequences, to be 
enriched for intermediate expression levels, and to be associated with slower 
rates of molecular evolution. Most importantly, gbM genes tend to maintain their 
level of DNA methylation between species, suggesting that this trait is under 
evolutionary constraint. Given the degree of conservation in gbM, we still know 
surprisingly little about its function in plant genomes or whether gbM is itself 
a target of selection. To address these questions, we surveyed DNA methylation 
across eight grass (Poaceae) species that span a gradient of genome sizes. We 
first established that genome size correlates with genome-wide DNA methylation 
levels, but less so for genic levels. We then leveraged genomic data to identify 
a set of 2,982 putative orthologs among the eight species and examined shifts of 
methylation status for each ortholog in a phylogenetic context. A total of 55% 
of orthologs exhibited a shift in gbM, but these shifts occurred predominantly 
on terminal branches, indicating that shifts in gbM are rarely conveyed over 
time. Finally, we found that the degree of conservation of gbM across species is 
associated with increased gene length, reduced rates of molecular evolution, and 
increased gene expression level, but reduced gene expression variation across 
species. Overall, these observations suggest a basis for evolutionary pressure 
to maintain gbM status over evolutionary time.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz195
PMID: 31504743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1485. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 May 1;37(5):1387-1393. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz202.

Molecular Evolution of Auxin-Mediated Root Initiation in Plants.

Yu J(1), Zhang Y(1)(2), Liu W(1), Wang H(1), Wen S(1)(3), Zhang Y(1), Xu L(1).

Author information:
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, CAS Center for 
Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Shanghai Institute of Plant Physiology 
and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)College of Life and Environment Sciences, Shanghai Normal University, 
Shanghai, China.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Aug 1;37(8):2462.

The root originated independently in euphyllophytes (ferns and seed plants) and 
lycophytes; however, the molecular evolutionary route of root initiation remains 
elusive. By analyses of the fern Ceratopteris richardii and seed plants, here we 
show that the molecular pathway involving auxin, intermediate-clade 
WUSCHEL-RELATED HOMEOBOX (IC-WOX) genes, and WUSCHEL-clade WOX (WC-WOX) genes 
could be conserved in root initiation. We propose that the "auxin>IC-WOX>WC-WOX" 
module in root initiation might have arisen in the common ancestor of 
euphyllophytes during the second origin of roots, and that this module has 
further developed during the evolution of different root types in ferns and seed 
plants.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz202
PMID: 31504735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1486. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2737-2747. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz180.

The Evolution of Reverse Gyrase Suggests a Nonhyperthermophilic Last Universal 
Common Ancestor.

Catchpole RJ(1)(2), Forterre P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Département de Microbiologie, Institut Pasteur, Unité de Biologie Moléculaire 
du Gène chez les Extrêmophiles (BMGE), Paris, France.
(2)Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, University 
of Paris-Sud, University of Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Reverse gyrase (RG) is the only protein found ubiquitously in hyperthermophilic 
organisms, but absent from mesophiles. As such, its simple presence or absence 
allows us to deduce information about the optimal growth temperature of 
long-extinct organisms, even as far as the last universal common ancestor of 
extant life (LUCA). The growth environment and gene content of the LUCA has long 
been a source of debate in which RG often features. In an attempt to settle this 
debate, we carried out an exhaustive search for RG proteins, generating the 
largest RG data set to date. Comprising 376 sequences, our data set allows for 
phylogenetic reconstructions of RG with unprecedented size and detail. These RG 
phylogenies are strikingly different from those of universal proteins inferred 
to be present in the LUCA, even when using the same set of species. Unlike such 
proteins, RG does not form monophyletic archaeal and bacterial clades, 
suggesting RG emergence after the formation of these domains, and/or significant 
horizontal gene transfer. Additionally, the branch lengths separating archaeal 
and bacterial groups are very short, inconsistent with the tempo of evolution 
from the time of the LUCA. Despite this, phylogenies limited to archaeal RG 
resolve most archaeal phyla, suggesting predominantly vertical evolution since 
the time of the last archaeal ancestor. In contrast, bacterial RG indicates 
emergence after the last bacterial ancestor followed by significant horizontal 
transfer. Taken together, these results suggest a nonhyperthermophilic LUCA and 
bacterial ancestor, with hyperthermophily emerging early in the evolution of the 
archaeal and bacterial domains.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz180
PMCID: PMC6878951
PMID: 31504731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1487. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):71-83. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz200.

Can the RNA World Still Function without Cytidine?

Tupper AS(1), Pudritz RE(2), Higgs PG(2).

Author information:
(1)Origins Institute and Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Origins Institute and Department of Physics and Astronomy, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Most scenarios for the origin of life assume that RNA played a key role in both 
catalysis and information storage. The A, U, G, and C nucleobases in modern RNA 
all participate in secondary structure formation and replication. However, the 
rapid deamination of C to U and the absence of C in meteorite samples suggest 
that prebiotic RNA may have been deficient in cytosine. Here, we assess the 
ability of RNA sequences formed from a three-letter AUG alphabet to perform both 
structural and genetic roles in comparison to sequences formed from the AUGC 
alphabet. Despite forming less thermodynamically stable helices, the AUG 
alphabet can find a broad range of structures and thus appears sufficient for 
catalysis in the RNA World. However, in the AUG case, longer sequences are 
required to form structures with an equivalent complexity. Replication in the 
AUG alphabet requires GU pairing. Sequence fidelity in the AUG alphabet is low 
whenever G's are present in the sequence. We find that AUG sequences evolve to 
AU sequences if GU pairing is rare, and to RU sequences if GU pairing is common 
(R denotes A or G). It is not possible to conserve a G at a specific site in 
either case. These problems do not rule out the possibility of an RNA World 
based on AUG, but they show that it wouldbe significantly more difficult than 
with a four-base alphabet.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz200
PMID: 31504724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1488. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2854-2860. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz210.

Solving the Riddle of the Evolution of Shine-Dalgarno Based Translation in 
Chloroplasts.

Weiner I(1)(2), Shahar N(2), Marco P(2), Yacoby I(2), Tuller T(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, The Iby and Aladar Fleischman Faculty 
of Engineering, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)School of Plant Sciences and Food Security, The George S. Wise Faculty of 
Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)The Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):609.

Chloroplasts originated from an ancient cyanobacterium and still harbor a 
bacterial-like genome. However, the centrality of Shine-Dalgarno ribosome 
binding, which predominantly regulates proteobacterial translation initiation, 
is significantly decreased in chloroplasts. As plastid ribosomal RNA 
anti-Shine-Dalgarno elements are similar to their bacterial counterparts, these 
sites alone cannot explain this decline. By computational simulation we show 
that upstream point mutations modulate the local structure of ribosomal RNA in 
chloroplasts, creating significantly tighter structures around the 
anti-Shine-Dalgarno locus, which in-turn reduce the probability of ribosome 
binding. To validate our model, we expressed two reporter genes (mCherry, 
hydrogenase) harboring a Shine-Dalgarno motif in the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii 
chloroplast. Coexpressing them with a 16S ribosomal RNA, modified according to 
our model, significantly enhances mCherry and hydrogenase expression compared 
with coexpression with an endogenous 16S gene.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz210
PMID: 31503284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1489. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):110-123. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz206.

Gene Expression Modularity Reveals Footprints of Polygenic Adaptation in 
Theobroma cacao.

Hämälä T(1), Guiltinan MJ(2)(3), Marden JH(3)(4), Maximova SN(2)(3), dePamphilis 
CW(3)(4), Tiffin P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, 
MN.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, PA.
(3)Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, PA.
(4)Department of Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA.

Separating footprints of adaptation from demography is challenging. When 
selection has acted on a single locus with major effect, this issue can be 
alleviated through signatures left by selective sweeps. However, as adaptation 
is often driven by small allele frequency shifts at many loci, studies focusing 
on single genes are able to identify only a small portion of genomic variants 
responsible for adaptation. In face of this challenge, we utilize coexpression 
information to search for signals of polygenetic adaptation in Theobroma cacao, 
a tropical tree species that is the source of chocolate. Using transcriptomics 
and a weighted correlation network analysis, we group genes with similar 
expression patterns into functional modules. We then ask whether modules 
enriched for specific biological processes exhibit cumulative effects of 
differential selection in the form of high FST and dXY between populations. 
Indeed, modules putatively involved in protein modification, flowering, and 
water transport show signs of polygenic adaptation even though individual genes 
that are members of those groups do not bear strong signatures of selection. 
Modeling of demography, background selection, and the effects of genomic 
features reveal that these patterns are unlikely to arise by chance. We also 
find that specific modules are enriched for signals of strong or relaxed 
purifying selection, with one module bearing signs of adaptive differentiation 
and an excess of deleterious mutations. Our results provide insight into 
polygenic adaptation and contribute to understanding of population structure, 
demographic history, and genome evolution in T. cacao.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz206
PMID: 31501906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1490. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):124-133. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz207.

Archaeal Ribosomal Proteins Possess Nuclear Localization Signal-Type Motifs: 
Implications for the Origin of the Cell Nucleus.

Melnikov S(1), Kwok HS(1), Manakongtreecheep K(1), van den Elzen A(2), Thoreen 
CC(2), Söll D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):305-306.

Eukaryotic cells are divided into the nucleus and the cytosol, and, to enter the 
nucleus, proteins typically possess short signal sequences, known as nuclear 
localization signals (NLSs). Although NLSs have long been considered as features 
unique to eukaryotic proteins, we show here that similar or identical protein 
segments are present in ribosomal proteins from the Archaea. Specifically, the 
ribosomal proteins uL3, uL15, uL18, and uS12 possess NLS-type motifs that are 
conserved across all major branches of the Archaea, including the most ancient 
groups Microarchaeota and Diapherotrites, pointing to the ancient origin of 
NLS-type motifs in the Archaea. Furthermore, by using fluorescence microscopy, 
we show that the archaeal NLS-type motifs can functionally substitute eukaryotic 
NLSs and direct the transport of ribosomal proteins into the nuclei of human 
cells. Collectively, these findings illustrate that the origin of NLSs preceded 
the origin of the cell nucleus, suggesting that the initial function of NLSs was 
not related to intracellular trafficking, but possibly was to improve 
recognition of nucleic acids by cellular proteins. Overall, our study reveals 
rare evolutionary intermediates among archaeal cells that can help elucidate the 
sequence of events that led to the origin of the eukaryotic cell.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz207
PMCID: PMC6984363
PMID: 31501901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1491. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):134-148. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz208.

Genomic and Phenotypic Analyses Reveal Mechanisms Underlying Homing Ability in 
Pigeon.

Shao Y(1), Tian HY(1)(2), Zhang JJ(3)(4), Kharrati-Koopaee H(5)(6), Guo X(7), 
Zhuang XL(1)(2), Li ML(1)(2), Nanaie HA(5), Dehghani Tafti E(8), Shojaei B(8), 
Reza Namavar M(9)(10), Sotoudeh N(9)(11), Oluwakemi Ayoola A(1)(2), Li 
JL(3)(12), Liang B(3)(12), Esmailizadeh A(1)(5), Wang S(13), Wu DD(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)Kunming College of Life Science, University of the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms, Kunming 
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(4)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical 
University, Zhanjiang, China.
(5)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Shahid Bahonar 
University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran.
(6)Institute of Biotechnology, School of Agriculture, Shiraz University, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(7)College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, 
Hefei, China.
(8)Department of Basic Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Shahid Bahonar 
University of Kerman, Kerman, Iran.
(9)Clinical Neurology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(10)Histomorphometry and Stereology Research Center, Shiraz University of 
Medical Science, Shiraz, Iran.
(11)Anatomy Department, School of Medicine, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(12)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.
(13)School of Basic Medical Sciences, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

The homing pigeon was selectively bred from the domestic pigeon for a homing 
ability over long distances, a very fascinating but complex behavioral trait. 
Here, we generate a total of 95 whole genomes from diverse pigeon breeds. 
Comparing the genomes from the homing pigeon population with those from other 
breeds identifies candidate positively selected genes, including many genes 
involved in the central nervous system, particularly spatial learning and memory 
such as LRP8. Expression profiling reveals many neuronal genes displaying 
differential expression in the hippocampus, which is the key organ for memory 
and navigation and exhibits significantly larger size in the homing pigeon. In 
addition, we uncover a candidate gene GSR (encoding glutathione-disulfide 
reductase) experiencing positive selection in the homing pigeon. Expression 
profiling finds that GSR is highly expressed in the wattle and visual pigment 
cell layer, and displays increased expression levels in the homing pigeon. In 
vitro, a magnetic field stimulates increases in calcium ion concentration in 
cells expressing pigeon GSR. These findings support the importance of the 
hippocampus (functioning in spatial memory and navigation) for homing ability, 
and the potential involvement of GSR in pigeon magnetoreception.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz208
PMID: 31501895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1492. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):84-99. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz204.

Adaptive Radiation of the Flukes of the Family Fasciolidae Inferred from 
Genome-Wide Comparisons of Key Species.

Choi YJ(1), Fontenla S(2), Fischer PU(3), Le TH(4), Costábile A(2), Blair D(5), 
Brindley PJ(6), Tort JF(2), Cabada MM(7), Mitreva M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)McDonnell Genome Institute at Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, 
MO.
(2)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República, 
Montevideo, Uruguay.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO.
(4)Immunology Department, Institute of Biotechnology, Vietnam Academy of Science 
and Technology, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(5)College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical Medicine, and Research 
Center for Neglected Diseases of Poverty, School of Medicine & Health Sciences, 
George Washington University, Washington, DC.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):304.

Liver and intestinal flukes of the family Fasciolidae cause zoonotic food-borne 
infections that impact both agriculture and human health throughout the world. 
Their evolutionary history and the genetic basis underlying their phenotypic and 
ecological diversity are not well understood. To close that knowledge gap, we 
compared the whole genomes of Fasciola hepatica, Fasciola gigantica, and 
Fasciolopsis buski and determined that the split between Fasciolopsis and 
Fasciola took place ∼90 Ma in the late Cretaceous period, and that between 65 
and 50 Ma an intermediate host switch and a shift from intestinal to hepatic 
habitats occurred in the Fasciola lineage. The rapid climatic and ecological 
changes occurring during this period may have contributed to the adaptive 
radiation of these flukes. Expansion of cathepsins, fatty-acid-binding proteins, 
protein disulfide-isomerases, and molecular chaperones in the genus Fasciola 
highlights the significance of excretory-secretory proteins in these 
liver-dwelling flukes. Fasciola hepatica and Fasciola gigantica diverged ∼5 Ma 
near the Miocene-Pliocene boundary that coincides with reduced faunal exchange 
between Africa and Eurasia. Severe decrease in the effective population size 
∼10 ka in Fasciola is consistent with a founder effect associated with its 
recent global spread through ruminant domestication. G-protein-coupled receptors 
may have key roles in adaptation of physiology and behavior to new ecological 
niches. This study has provided novel insights about the genome evolution of 
these important pathogens, has generated genomic resources to enable development 
of improved interventions and diagnosis, and has laid a solid foundation for 
genomic epidemiology to trace drug resistance and to aid surveillance.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz204
PMCID: PMC7528651
PMID: 31501870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1493. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2830-2841. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz193.

Horizontal Transfer of Promiscuous Activity from Nonphotosynthetic Bacteria 
Contributed to Evolution of Chlorophyll Degradation Pathway.

Obata D(1), Takabayashi A(1), Tanaka R(1), Tanaka A(1), Ito H(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Low Temperature Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

The relationship between enzymes and substrates does not perfectly match the 
"lock and key" model, because enzymes act on molecules other than their true 
substrate in different catalytic reactions. Such biologically nonfunctional 
reactions are called "promiscuous activities." Promiscuous activities are 
apparently useless, but they can be an important starting point for enzyme 
evolution. It has been hypothesized that enzymes with low promiscuous activity 
will show enhanced promiscuous activity under selection pressure and become new 
specialists through gene duplication. Although this is the prevailing scenario, 
there are two major problems: 1) it would not apply to prokaryotes because 
horizontal gene transfer is more significant than gene duplication and 2) there 
is no direct evidence that promiscuous activity is low without selection 
pressure. We propose a new scenario including various levels of promiscuous 
activity throughout a clade and horizontal gene transfer. STAY-GREEN (SGR), a 
chlorophyll a-Mg dechelating enzyme, has homologous genes in bacteria lacking 
chlorophyll. We found that some bacterial SGR homologs have much higher 
Mg-dechelating activities than those of green plant SGRs, while others have no 
activity, indicating that the level of promiscuous activity varies. A 
phylogenetic analysis suggests that a bacterial SGR homolog with high 
dechelating activity was horizontally transferred to a photosynthetic eukaryote. 
Some SGR homologs acted on various chlorophyll molecules that are not used as 
substrates by green plant SGRs, indicating that SGR acquired substrate 
specificity after transfer to eukaryotes. We propose that horizontal transfer of 
high promiscuous activity is one process of new enzyme acquisition.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz193
PMID: 31432082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1494. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2813-2822. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz190.

Opposing Pressures of Speed and Efficiency Guide the Evolution of Molecular 
Machines.

Wagoner JA(1), Dill KA(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laufer Center for Physical and Quantitative Biology, Stony Brook University, 
Stony Brook, NY.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY.
(3)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY.

Many biomolecular machines need to be both fast and efficient. How has evolution 
optimized these machines along the tradeoff between speed and efficiency? We 
explore this question using optimizable dynamical models along coordinates that 
are plausible evolutionary degrees of freedom. Data on 11 motors and ion pumps 
are consistent with the hypothesis that evolution seeks an optimal balance of 
speed and efficiency, where any further small increase in one of these 
quantities would come at great expense to the other. For FoF1-ATPases in 
different species, we also find apparent optimization of the number of subunits 
in the c-ring, which determines the number of protons pumped per ATP 
synthesized. Interestingly, these ATPases appear to more optimized for 
efficiency than for speed, which can be rationalized through their key role as 
energy transducers in biology. The present modeling shows how the dynamical 
performance properties of biomolecular motors and pumps may have evolved to suit 
their corresponding biological actions.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz190
PMCID: PMC6878954
PMID: 31432071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1495. Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Jan 1;37(1):291-294. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz189.

ModelTest-NG: A New and Scalable Tool for the Selection of DNA and Protein 
Evolutionary Models.

Darriba D(1)(2), Posada D(3)(4)(5), Kozlov AM(2), Stamatakis A(2)(6), Morel 
B(2), Flouri T(7).

Author information:
(1)Computer Architecture Group, Centro de investigación CITIC, Universidade da 
Coruña, Elviña, A Coruña, Spain.
(2)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics, and Immunology, University of Vigo, 
Vigo, Spain.
(4)Biomedical Research Center (CINBIO), University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain.
(5)Galicia Sur Health Research Institute, Vigo, Spain.
(6)Institute of Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
Karlsruhe, Germany.
(7)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.

ModelTest-NG is a reimplementation from scratch of jModelTest and ProtTest, two 
popular tools for selecting the best-fit nucleotide and amino acid substitution 
models, respectively. ModelTest-NG is one to two orders of magnitude faster than 
jModelTest and ProtTest but equally accurate and introduces several new 
features, such as ascertainment bias correction, mixture, and free-rate models, 
or the automatic processing of single partitions. ModelTest-NG is available 
under a GNU GPL3 license at https://github.com/ddarriba/modeltest , last 
accessed September 2, 2019.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz189
PMCID: PMC6984357
PMID: 31432070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1496. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2906-2921. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz191.

Contemporary Demographic Reconstruction Methods Are Robust to Genome Assembly 
Quality: A Case Study in Tasmanian Devils.

Patton AH(1), Margres MJ(1)(2), Stahlke AR(3), Hendricks S(3), Lewallen K(3), 
Hamede RK(4), Ruiz-Aravena M(5), Ryder O(6), McCallum HI(5), Jones ME(4), 
Hohenlohe PA(3), Storfer A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, MA.
(3)Institute for Bioinformatics and Evolutionary Studies, University of Idaho, 
Moscow, ID.
(4)School of Natural Sciences, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Australia.
(5)School of the Environment, Griffith University, Nathan, Australia.
(6)Institute for Conservation Research, San Diego, CA.

Reconstructing species' demographic histories is a central focus of molecular 
ecology and evolution. Recently, an expanding suite of methods leveraging either 
the sequentially Markovian coalescent (SMC) or the site-frequency spectrum has 
been developed to reconstruct population size histories from genomic sequence 
data. However, few studies have investigated the robustness of these methods to 
genome assemblies of varying quality. In this study, we first present an 
improved genome assembly for the Tasmanian devil using the Chicago library 
method. Compared with the original reference genome, our new assembly reduces 
the number of scaffolds (from 35,975 to 10,010) and increases the scaffold N90 
(from 0.101 to 2.164 Mb). Second, we assess the performance of four contemporary 
genomic methods for inferring population size history (PSMC, MSMC, SMC++, 
Stairway Plot), using the two devil genome assemblies as well as simulated, 
artificially fragmented genomes that approximate the hypothesized demographic 
history of Tasmanian devils. We demonstrate that each method is robust to 
assembly quality, producing similar estimates of Ne when simulated genomes were 
fragmented into up to 5,000 scaffolds. Overall, methods reliant on the SMC are 
most reliable between ∼300 generations before present (gbp) and 100 kgbp, 
whereas methods exclusively reliant on the site-frequency spectrum are most 
reliable between the present and 30 gbp. Our results suggest that when used in 
concert, genomic methods for reconstructing species' effective population size 
histories 1) can be applied to nonmodel organisms without highly contiguous 
reference genomes, and 2) are capable of detecting independently documented 
effects of historical geological events.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz191
PMCID: PMC6878949
PMID: 31424552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1497. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2883-2889. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz182.

NUQA: Estimating Cancer Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity and Evolution through 
Alignment-Free Methods.

Roddy AC(1), Jurek-Loughrey A(2), Souza J(1), Gilmore A(1), O'Reilly PG(1), 
Stupnikov A(1)(3), Gonzalez de Castro D(1), Prise KM(1), Salto-Tellez M(1), 
McArt DG(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast, 
Belfast, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Electronics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Queen's 
University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Oncology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD.

Longitudinal next-generation sequencing of cancer patient samples has enhanced 
our understanding of the evolution and progression of various cancers. As a 
result, and due to our increasing knowledge of heterogeneity, such sampling is 
becoming increasingly common in research and clinical trial sample collections. 
Traditionally, the evolutionary analysis of these cohorts involves the use of an 
aligner followed by subsequent stringent downstream analyses. However, this can 
lead to large levels of information loss due to the vast mutational landscape 
that characterizes tumor samples. Here, we propose an alignment-free approach 
for sequence comparison-a well-established approach in a range of biological 
applications including typical phylogenetic classification. Such methods could 
be used to compare information collated in raw sequence files to allow an 
unsupervised assessment of the evolutionary trajectory of patient genomic 
profiles. In order to highlight this utility in cancer research we have applied 
our alignment-free approach using a previously established metric, 
Jensen-Shannon divergence, and a metric novel to this area, Hellinger distance, 
to two longitudinal cancer patient cohorts in glioma and clear cell renal cell 
carcinoma using our software, NUQA. We hypothesize that this approach has the 
potential to reveal novel information about the heterogeneity and evolutionary 
trajectory of spatiotemporal tumor samples, potentially revealing early events 
in tumorigenesis and the origins of metastases and recurrences. Key words: 
alignment-free, Hellinger distance, exome-seq, evolution, phylogenetics, 
longitudinal.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz182
PMCID: PMC6878956
PMID: 31424551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1498. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2805-2812. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz188.

Comparative Genomic Characterization of the Multimammate Mouse Mastomys coucha.

Hardin A(1)(2), Nevonen KA(3), Eckalbar WL(1)(2), Carbone L(3)(4)(5)(6), Ahituv 
N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(2)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Knight Cardiovascular Institute, Oregon Health and 
Science University, Portland, OR.
(4)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR.
(5)Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology, Oregon Health 
and Science University, Portland, OR.
(6)Division of Genetics, Oregon National Primate Research Center, Beaverton, OR.

Mastomys are the most widespread African rodent and carriers of various diseases 
such as the plague or Lassa virus. In addition, mastomys have rapidly gained a 
large number of mammary glands. Here, we generated a genome, variome, and 
transcriptomes for Mastomys coucha. As mastomys diverged at similar times from 
mouse and rat, we demonstrate their utility as a comparative genomic tool for 
these commonly used animal models. Furthermore, we identified over 500 mastomys 
accelerated regions, often residing near important mammary developmental genes 
or within their exons leading to protein sequence changes. Functional 
characterization of a noncoding mastomys accelerated region, located in the HoxD 
locus, showed enhancer activity in mouse developing mammary glands. Combined, 
our results provide genomic resources for mastomys and highlight their potential 
both as a comparative genomic tool and for the identification of mammary gland 
number determining factors.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz188
PMCID: PMC6878952
PMID: 31424545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1499. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2823-2829. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz192.

Direct Evidence of an Increasing Mutational Load in Humans.

Aris-Brosou S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.

The extent to which selection has shaped present-day human populations has 
attracted intense scrutiny, and examples of local adaptations abound. However, 
the evolutionary trajectory of alleles that, today, are deleterious has received 
much less attention. To address this question, the genomes of 2,062 individuals, 
including 1,179 ancient humans, were reanalyzed to assess how frequencies of 
risk alleles and their homozygosity changed through space and time in Europe 
over the past 45,000 years. Although the overall deleterious homozygosity has 
consistently decreased, risk alleles have steadily increased in frequency over 
that period of time. Those that increased most are associated with diseases such 
as asthma, Crohn disease, diabetes, and obesity, which are highly prevalent in 
present-day populations. These findings may not run against the existence of 
local adaptations but highlight the limitations imposed by drift and population 
dynamics on the strength of selection in purging deleterious mutations from 
human populations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz192
PMID: 31424543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1500. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2790-2804. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz187.

Diversification of Retinoblastoma Protein Function Associated with Cis and Trans 
Adaptations.

Mouawad R(1), Prasad J(2), Thorley D(2), Himadewi P(2), Kadiyala D(2), Wilson 
N(2), Kapranov P(3), Arnosti DN(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI.
(3)Institute of Genomics, School of Biomedical Sciences, Huaqiao University, 
Xiamen, China.

Retinoblastoma proteins are eukaryotic transcriptional corepressors that play 
central roles in cell cycle control, among other functions. Although most 
metazoan genomes encode a single retinoblastoma protein, gene duplications have 
occurred at least twice: in the vertebrate lineage, leading to Rb, p107, and 
p130, and in Drosophila, an ancestral Rbf1 gene and a derived Rbf2 gene. 
Structurally, Rbf1 resembles p107 and p130, and mutation of the gene is lethal. 
Rbf2 is more divergent and mutation does not lead to lethality. However, the 
retention of Rbf2 >60 My in Drosophila points to essential functions, which 
prior cell-based assays have been unable to elucidate. Here, using genomic 
approaches, we provide new insights on the function of Rbf2. Strikingly, we show 
that Rbf2 regulates a set of cell growth-related genes and can antagonize Rbf1 
on specific genes. These unique properties have important implications for the 
fly; Rbf2 mutants show reduced egg laying, and lifespan is reduced in females 
and males. Structural alterations in conserved regions of Rbf2 gene suggest that 
it was sub- or neofunctionalized to develop specific regulatory specificity and 
activity. We define cis-regulatory features of Rbf2 target genes that allow 
preferential repression by this protein, indicating that it is not a weaker 
version of Rbf1 as previously thought. The specialization of retinoblastoma 
function in Drosophila may reflect a parallel evolution found in vertebrates, 
and raises the possibility that cell growth control is equally important to cell 
cycle function for this conserved family of transcriptional corepressors.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz187
PMCID: PMC6878959
PMID: 31418797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1501. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2922-2924. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz185.

Sequenceserver: A Modern Graphical User Interface for Custom BLAST Databases.

Priyam A(1), Woodcroft BJ(2), Rai V(3), Moghul I(1), Munagala A(4), Ter F(1), 
Chowdhary H(4), Pieniak I(1), Maynard LJ(1), Gibbins MA(5), Moon H(6), 
Davis-Richardson A(7), Uludag M(8), Watson-Haigh NS(9), Challis R(10)(11), 
Nakamura H(12), Favreau E(1), Gómez EA(1), Pluskal T(13), Leonard G(14), Rumpf 
W(15), Wurm Y(1)(16).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Australia.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
Kharagpur, India.
(4)Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 
Kharagpur, India.
(5)Department of Computer Science, Royal Holloway University of London, Surrey, 
United Kingdom.
(6)Scientific Computing Facility, Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology 
and Genetics, Dresden, Germany.
(7)San Francisco, CA.
(8)Computational Bioscience Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science 
and Technology, Thuwal, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(9)Bioinformatics Hub, School of Biological Sciences, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, Australia.
(10)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
United Kingdom.
(11)Wellcome Sanger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, CB10 1SA.
(12)Spiber Inc, Kakuganji Tsuruoka, Yamagata, Japan.
(13)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA.
(14)Living Systems Institute, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(15)The Institute for Genomic Medicine, The Abigail Wexner Research Institute at 
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH.
(16)5Bases Limited, London, United Kingdom.

Comparing newly obtained and previously known nucleotide and amino-acid 
sequences underpins modern biological research. BLAST is a well-established tool 
for such comparisons but is challenging to use on new data sets. We combined a 
user-centric design philosophy with sustainable software development approaches 
to create Sequenceserver, a tool for running BLAST and visually inspecting BLAST 
results for biological interpretation. Sequenceserver uses simple algorithms to 
prevent potential analysis errors and provides flexible text-based and visual 
outputs to support researcher productivity. Our software can be rapidly 
installed for use by individuals or on shared servers.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz185
PMCID: PMC6878946
PMID: 31411700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1502. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2604-2619. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz179.

GEMME: A Simple and Fast Global Epistatic Model Predicting Mutational Effects.

Laine E(1), Karami Y(1)(2), Carbone A(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, CNRS, IBPS, UMR 7238, Laboratoire de Biologie 
Computationnelle et Quantitative (LCQB), 75005 Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne Université, Institut du Calcul et de la Simulation, Sorbonne 
Université, Paris, France.
(3)Institut Universitaire de France, Paris, France.

The systematic and accurate description of protein mutational landscapes is a 
question of utmost importance in biology, bioengineering, and medicine. Recent 
progress has been achieved by leveraging on the increasing wealth of genomic 
data and by modeling intersite dependencies within biological sequences. 
However, state-of-the-art methods remain time consuming. Here, we present Global 
Epistatic Model for predicting Mutational Effects (GEMME) 
(www.lcqb.upmc.fr/GEMME), an original and fast method that predicts mutational 
outcomes by explicitly modeling the evolutionary history of natural sequences. 
This allows accounting for all positions in a sequence when estimating the 
effect of a given mutation. GEMME uses only a few biologically meaningful and 
interpretable parameters. Assessed against 50 high- and low-throughput 
mutational experiments, it overall performs similarly or better than existing 
methods. It accurately predicts the mutational landscapes of a wide range of 
protein families, including viral ones and, more generally, of much conserved 
families. Given an input alignment, it generates the full mutational landscape 
of a protein in a matter of minutes. It is freely available as a package and a 
webserver at www.lcqb.upmc.fr/GEMME/.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz179
PMCID: PMC6805226
PMID: 31406981


1503. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2890-2905. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz183.

Optimizing the Power to Identify the Genetic Basis of Complex Traits with Evolve 
and Resequence Studies.

Vlachos C(1)(2), Kofler R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute für Populationsgenetik, Vetmeduni Vienna, Wien, Austria.
(2)Vienna Graduate School of Population Genetics, Wien, Austria.

Evolve and resequence (E&R) studies are frequently used to dissect the genetic 
basis of quantitative traits. By subjecting a population to truncating selection 
for several generations and estimating the allele frequency differences between 
selected and nonselected populations using next-generation sequencing (NGS), the 
loci contributing to the selected trait may be identified. The role of different 
parameters, such as, the population size or the number of replicate populations 
has been examined in previous works. However, the influence of the selection 
regime, that is the strength of truncating selection during the experiment, 
remains little explored. Using whole genome, individual based forward 
simulations of E&R studies, we found that the power to identify the causative 
alleles may be maximized by gradually increasing the strength of truncating 
selection during the experiment. Notably, such an optimal selection regime comes 
at no or little additional cost in terms of sequencing effort and experimental 
time. Interestingly, we also found that a selection regime which optimizes the 
power to identify the causative loci is not necessarily identical to a regime 
that maximizes the phenotypic response. Finally, our simulations suggest that an 
E&R study with an optimized selection regime may have a higher power to identify 
the genetic basis of quantitative traits than a genome-wide association study, 
highlighting that E&R is a powerful approach for finding the loci underlying 
complex traits.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz183
PMCID: PMC6878953
PMID: 31400203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1504. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2764-2777. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz184.

Impact of In Vivo Protein Folding Probability on Local Fitness Landscapes.

Faber MS(1), Wrenbeck EE(2), Azouz LR(2), Steiner PJ(3), Whitehead TA(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI.
(3)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, University of Colorado, 
Boulder, CO.
(4)E.E.W. Ginkgo Bioworks, L.R.A. McKetta Department of Chemical Engineering, 
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX.

It is incompletely understood how biophysical properties like protein stability 
impact molecular evolution and epistasis. Epistasis is defined as specific when 
a mutation exclusively influences the phenotypic effect of another mutation, 
often at physically interacting residues. In contrast, nonspecific epistasis 
results when a mutation is influenced by a large number of nonlocal mutations. 
As most mutations are pleiotropic, the in vivo folding probability-governed by 
basal protein stability-is thought to determine activity-enhancing mutational 
tolerance, implying that nonspecific epistasis is dominant. However, evidence 
exists for both specific and nonspecific epistasis as the prevalent factor, with 
limited comprehensive data sets to support either claim. Here, we use deep 
mutational scanning to probe how in vivo enzyme folding probability impacts 
local fitness landscapes. We computationally designed two different variants of 
the amidase AmiE with statistically indistinguishable catalytic efficiencies but 
lower probabilities of folding in vivo compared with wild-type. Local fitness 
landscapes show slight alterations among variants, with essentially the same 
global distribution of fitness effects. However, specific epistasis was 
predominant for the subset of mutations exhibiting positive sign epistasis. 
These mutations mapped to spatially distinct locations on AmiE near the initial 
mutation or proximal to the active site. Intriguingly, the majority of specific 
epistatic mutations were codon dependent, with different synonymous codons 
resulting in fitness sign reversals. Together, these results offer a nuanced 
view of how protein folding probability impacts local fitness landscapes and 
suggest that transcriptional-translational effects are as important as stability 
in determining evolutionary outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz184
PMID: 31400199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1505. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2498-2511. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz168.

MicroRNA Gene Regulation in Extremely Young and Parallel Adaptive Radiations of 
Crater Lake Cichlid Fish.

Franchini P(1), Xiong P(1), Fruciano C(1)(2), Schneider RF(1)(3), Woltering 
JM(1), Hulsey CD(1), Meyer A(1).

Author information:
(1)Lehrstuhl für Zoologie und Evolutionsbiologie, Department of Biology, 
University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany.
(2)Institut de biologie de l'Ecole normale supérieure (IBENS), Ecole normale 
supérieure, CNRS, PSL Université Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Marine Ecology, Helmholtz-Zentrum für Ozeanforschung Kiel (GEOMAR), 
Düsternbrooker Weg 20, Kiel, Germany.

Cichlid fishes provide textbook examples of explosive phenotypic diversification 
and sympatric speciation, thereby making them ideal systems for studying the 
molecular mechanisms underlying rapid lineage divergence. Despite the fact that 
gene regulation provides a critical link between diversification in gene 
function and speciation, many genomic regulatory mechanisms such as microRNAs 
(miRNAs) have received little attention in these rapidly diversifying groups. 
Therefore, we investigated the posttranscriptional regulatory role of miRNAs in 
the repeated sympatric divergence of Midas cichlids (Amphilophus spp.) from 
Nicaraguan crater lakes. Using miRNA and mRNA sequencing of embryos from five 
Midas species, we first identified miRNA binding sites in mRNAs and highlighted 
the presences of a surprising number of novel miRNAs in these adaptively 
radiating species. Then, through analyses of expression levels, we identified 
putative miRNA/gene target pairs with negatively correlated expression level 
that were consistent with the role of miRNA in downregulating mRNA. Furthermore, 
we determined that several miRNA/gene pairs show convergent expression patterns 
associated with the repeated benthic/limnetic sympatric species divergence 
implicating these miRNAs as potential molecular mechanisms underlying replicated 
sympatric divergence. Finally, as these candidate miRNA/gene pairs may play a 
central role in phenotypic diversification in these cichlids, we characterized 
the expression domains of selected miRNAs and their target genes via in situ 
hybridization, providing further evidence that miRNA regulation likely plays a 
role in the Midas cichlid adaptive radiation. These results provide support for 
the hypothesis that extremely quickly evolving miRNA regulation can contribute 
to rapid evolutionary divergence even in the presence of gene flow.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz168
PMID: 31397871


1506. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2548-2556. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz167.

Evolution of the Cholesterol Biosynthesis Pathway in Animals.

Zhang T(1)(2)(3), Yuan D(1)(3)(4), Xie J(5), Lei Y(4)(6), Li J(7), Fang G(3)(4), 
Tian L(8), Liu J(4)(9), Cui Y(1), Zhang M(2), Xiao Y(6), Xu Y(3), Zhang J(2), 
Zhu M(10), Zhan S(3), Li S(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental Biology and 
Applied Technology, Institute of Insect Science and Technology, School of Life 
Sciences, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Research Institute of Applied Biology, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Insect Developmental and Evolutionary Biology, CAS 
Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology 
and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Institute of Plant Physiology and 
Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(7)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China.
(8)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Agro-animal Genomics and Molecular 
Breeding/Guangdong Provincial Sericulture and Mulberry Engineering Research 
Center, College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(9)The State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in 
Molecular Cell Science, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Shanghai 
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Paleobiology and Stratigraphy, Nanjing Institute of 
Geology and Palaeontology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, China.

Cholesterol plays essential roles in animal development and disease progression. 
Here, we characterize the evolutionary pattern of the canonical cholesterol 
biosynthesis pathway (CBP) in the animal kingdom using both genome-wide analyses 
and functional experiments. CBP genes in the basal metazoans were inherited from 
their last common eukaryotic ancestor and evolutionarily conserved for 
cholesterol biosynthesis. The genomes of both the basal metazoans and 
deuterostomes retain almost the full set of CBP genes, while Cnidaria and many 
protostomes have independently experienced multiple massive losses of CBP genes 
that might be due to the geologic events during the Ediacaran period, such as 
the appearance of an exogenous sterol supply and the frequent perturbation of 
ocean oxygenation. Meanwhile, the indispensable utilization processes of 
cholesterol potentially strengthened the maintenance of the complete set of CBP 
genes in vertebrates. These results strengthen both biotic and abiotic roles in 
the macroevolution of a biosynthesis pathway in animals.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz167
PMID: 31397867


1507. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2861-2877. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz177.

Accurate Tracking of the Mutational Landscape of Diploid Hybrid Genomes.

Tattini L(1), Tellini N(1), Mozzachiodi S(1), D'Angiolo M(1), Loeillet S(2), 
Nicolas A(2), Liti G(1).

Author information:
(1)CNRS UMR7284, INSERM, IRCAN, Université Côte d'Azur, Nice, France.
(2)CNRS UMR3244, Institut Curie, PSL Research University, Paris, France.

Mutations, recombinations, and genome duplications may promote genetic diversity 
and trigger evolutionary processes. However, quantifying these events in diploid 
hybrid genomes is challenging. Here, we present an integrated experimental and 
computational workflow to accurately track the mutational landscape of yeast 
diploid hybrids (MuLoYDH) in terms of single-nucleotide variants, small 
insertions/deletions, copy-number variants, aneuploidies, and 
loss-of-heterozygosity. Pairs of haploid Saccharomyces parents were combined to 
generate ancestor hybrids with phased genomes and varying levels of 
heterozygosity. These diploids were evolved under different laboratory 
protocols, in particular mutation accumulation experiments. Variant simulations 
enabled the efficient integration of competitive and standard mapping of short 
reads, depending on local levels of heterozygosity. Experimental validations 
proved the high accuracy and resolution of our computational approach. Finally, 
applying MuLoYDH to four different diploids revealed striking genetic background 
effects. Homozygous Saccharomyces cerevisiae showed a ∼4-fold higher mutation 
rate compared with its closely related species S. paradoxus. Intraspecies 
hybrids unveiled that a substantial fraction of the genome (∼250 bp per 
generation) was shaped by loss-of-heterozygosity, a process strongly inhibited 
in interspecies hybrids by high levels of sequence divergence between homologous 
chromosomes. In contrast, interspecies hybrids exhibited higher 
single-nucleotide mutation rates compared with intraspecies hybrids. MuLoYDH 
provided an unprecedented quantitative insight into the evolutionary processes 
that mold diploid yeast genomes and can be generalized to other genetic systems.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz177
PMCID: PMC6878955
PMID: 31397846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1508. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2748-2763. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz181.

Parallel Evolution of Complex Centipede Venoms Revealed by Comparative 
Proteotranscriptomic Analyses.

Jenner RA(1), von Reumont BM(2)(3)(4), Campbell LI(5), Undheim EAB(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(2)LOEWE Centre for Translational Biodiversity Genomics (LOEWE-TBG), Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(3)Institute for Insect Biotechnology, Justus-Liebig University Giessen, 
Giessen, Germany.
(4)Department of Bioresources, Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and 
Applied Ecology, Animal Venomics, Giessen, Germany.
(5)The European Molecular Biology Laboratory, The European Bioinformatics 
Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(6)Centre for Advanced Imaging, University of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia.
(7)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia, 
Australia.
(8)Centre for Ecology and Evolutionary Synthesis, Department of Bioscience, 
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Aug 23;38(9):4057.

Centipedes are among the most ancient groups of venomous predatory arthropods. 
Extant species belong to five orders, but our understanding of the composition 
and evolution of centipede venoms is based almost exclusively on one order, 
Scolopendromorpha. To gain a broader and less biased understanding we performed 
a comparative proteotranscriptomic analysis of centipede venoms from all five 
orders, including the first venom profiles for the orders Lithobiomorpha, 
Craterostigmomorpha, and Geophilomorpha. Our results reveal an astonishing 
structural diversity of venom components, with 93 phylogenetically distinct 
protein and peptide families. Proteomically-annotated gene trees of these 
putative toxin families show that centipede venom composition is highly dynamic 
across macroevolutionary timescales, with numerous gene duplications as well as 
functional recruitments and losses of toxin gene families. Strikingly, not a 
single family is found in the venoms of representatives of all five orders, with 
67 families being unique for single orders. Ancestral state reconstructions 
reveal that centipede venom originated as a simple cocktail comprising just four 
toxin families, with very little compositional evolution happening during the 
approximately 50 My before the living orders had diverged. Venom complexity then 
increased in parallel within the orders, with scolopendromorphs evolving 
particularly complex venoms. Our results show that even venoms composed of 
toxins evolving under the strong constraint of negative selection can have 
striking evolutionary plasticity on the compositional level. We show that the 
functional recruitments and losses of toxin families that shape centipede venom 
arsenals are not concentrated early in their evolutionary history, but happen 
frequently throughout.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz181
PMCID: PMC6878950
PMID: 31396628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1509. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2292-2312. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz147.

The Oxymonad Genome Displays Canonical Eukaryotic Complexity in the Absence of a 
Mitochondrion.

Karnkowska A(1)(2), Treitli SC(1), Brzoň O(1), Novák L(1), Vacek V(1), Soukal 
P(1), Barlow LD(3), Herman EK(3), Pipaliya SV(3), Pánek T(4), Žihala D(4), 
Petrželková R(4), Butenko A(4), Eme L(5)(6), Stairs CW(5)(6), Roger AJ(5), Eliáš 
M(4)(7), Dacks JB(3), Hampl V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, BIOCEV, Faculty of Science, Charles University, 
Vestec, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, Faculty of Biology, 
Biological and Chemical Research Centre, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(4)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Canada.
(6)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
(7)Institute of Environmental Technologies, Faculty of Science, University of 
Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.

The discovery that the protist Monocercomonoides exilis completely lacks 
mitochondria demonstrates that these organelles are not absolutely essential to 
eukaryotic cells. However, the degree to which the metabolism and cellular 
systems of this organism have adapted to the loss of mitochondria is unknown. 
Here, we report an extensive analysis of the M. exilis genome to address this 
question. Unexpectedly, we find that M. exilis genome structure and content is 
similar in complexity to other eukaryotes and less "reduced" than genomes of 
some other protists from the Metamonada group to which it belongs. Furthermore, 
the predicted cytoskeletal systems, the organization of endomembrane systems, 
and biosynthetic pathways also display canonical eukaryotic complexity. The only 
apparent preadaptation that permitted the loss of mitochondria was the 
acquisition of the SUF system for Fe-S cluster assembly and the loss of glycine 
cleavage system. Changes in other systems, including in amino acid metabolism 
and oxidative stress response, were coincident with the loss of mitochondria but 
are likely adaptations to the microaerophilic and endobiotic niche rather than 
the mitochondrial loss per se. Apart from the lack of mitochondria and 
peroxisomes, we show that M. exilis is a fully elaborated eukaryotic cell that 
is a promising model system in which eukaryotic cell biology can be investigated 
in the absence of mitochondria.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz147
PMCID: PMC6759080
PMID: 31387118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1510. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2878-2882. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz178.

A Three-Sample Test for Introgression.

Hahn MW(1)(2), Hibbins MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.

Many methods exist for detecting introgression between nonsister species, but 
the most commonly used require either a single sequence from four or more taxa 
or multiple sequences from each of three taxa. Here, we present a test for 
introgression that uses only a single sequence from three taxa. This test, 
denoted D3, uses similar logic as the standard D-test for introgression, but by 
using pairwise distances instead of site patterns it is able to detect the same 
signal of introgression with fewer species. We use simulations to show that D3 
has statistical power almost equal to D, demonstrating its use on a data set of 
wild bananas (Musa). The new test is easy to apply and easy to interpret, and 
should find wide use among currently available data sets.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz178
PMID: 31373630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1511. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2387-2399. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz171.

Multiple Plasticity Regulators Reveal Targets Specifying an Induced Predatory 
Form in Nematodes.

Bui LT(1), Ragsdale EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.

The ability to translate a single genome into multiple phenotypes, or 
developmental plasticity, defines how phenotype derives from more than just 
genes. However, to study the evolutionary targets of plasticity and their 
evolutionary fates, we need to understand how genetic regulators of plasticity 
control downstream gene expression. Here, we have identified a transcriptional 
response specific to polyphenism (i.e., discrete plasticity) in the nematode 
Pristionchus pacificus. This species produces alternative resource-use 
morphs-microbivorous and predatory forms, differing in the form of their teeth, 
a morphological novelty-as influenced by resource availability. Transcriptional 
profiles common to multiple polyphenism-controlling genes in P. pacificus reveal 
a suite of environmentally sensitive loci, or ultimate target genes, that make 
up an induced developmental response. Additionally, in vitro assays show that 
one polyphenism regulator, the nuclear receptor NHR-40, physically binds to 
promoters with putative HNF4α (the nuclear receptor class including NHR-40) 
binding sites, suggesting this receptor may directly regulate genes that 
describe alternative morphs. Among differentially expressed genes were 
morph-limited genes, highlighting factors with putative "on-off" function in 
plasticity regulation. Further, predatory morph-biased genes included 
candidates-namely, all four P. pacificus homologs of Hsp70, which have HNF4α 
motifs-whose natural variation in expression matches phenotypic differences 
among P. pacificus wild isolates. In summary, our study links polyphenism 
regulatory loci to the transcription producing alternative forms of a 
morphological novelty. Consequently, our findings establish a platform for 
determining how specific regulators of morph-biased genes may influence 
selection on plastic phenotypes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz171
PMID: 31364718


1512. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2375-2386. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz170.

"Ghost Introgression" As a Cause of Deep Mitochondrial Divergence in a Bird 
Species Complex.

Zhang D(1)(2), Tang L(1)(2), Cheng Y(1)(2), Hao Y(1)(2), Xiong Y(1)(2), Song 
G(1), Qu Y(1), Rheindt FE(3), Alström P(1)(4)(5), Jia C(1), Lei F(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Zoological Systematics and Evolution, Institute of Zoology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.
(4)Animal Ecology, Department of Ecology and Genetics, Evolutionary Biology 
Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Swedish Species Information Centre, Swedish University of Agricultural 
Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

In the absence of nuclear-genomic differentiation between two populations, deep 
mitochondrial divergence (DMD) is a form of mito-nuclear discordance. Such 
instances of DMD are rare and might variably be explained by unusual cases of 
female-linked selection, by male-biased dispersal, by "speciation reversal" or 
by mitochondrial capture through genetic introgression. Here, we analyze DMD in 
an Asian Phylloscopus leaf warbler (Aves: Phylloscopidae) complex. Bioacoustic, 
morphological, and genomic data demonstrate close similarity between the taxa 
affinis and occisinensis, even though DMD previously led to their classification 
as two distinct species. Using population genomic and comparative genomic 
methods on 45 whole genomes, including historical reconstructions of effective 
population size, genomic peaks of differentiation and genomic linkage, we infer 
that the form affinis is likely the product of a westward expansion in which it 
replaced a now-extinct congener that was the donor of its mtDNA and small 
portions of its nuclear genome. This study provides strong evidence of "ghost 
introgression" as the cause of DMD, and we suggest that "ghost introgression" 
may be a widely overlooked phenomenon in nature.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz170
PMID: 31364717


1513. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2620-2628. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz172.

Bayesian Estimation of Past Population Dynamics in BEAST 1.10 Using the Skygrid 
Coalescent Model.

Hill V(1), Baele G(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Inferring past population dynamics over time from heterochronous molecular 
sequence data is often achieved using the Bayesian Skygrid model, a 
nonparametric coalescent model that estimates the effective population size over 
time. Available in BEAST, a cross-platform program for Bayesian analysis of 
molecular sequences using Markov chain Monte Carlo, this coalescent model is 
often estimated in conjunction with a molecular clock model to produce 
time-stamped phylogenetic trees. We here provide a practical guide to using 
BEAST and its accompanying applications for the purpose of drawing inference 
under these models. We focus on best practices, potential pitfalls, and 
recommendations that can be generalized to other software packages for Bayesian 
inference. This protocol shows how to use TempEst, BEAUti, and BEAST 1.10 
(http://beast.community/; last accessed July 29, 2019), LogCombiner as well as 
Tracer in a complete workflow.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz172
PMCID: PMC6805224
PMID: 31364710


1514. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2227-2237. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz097.

Adaptive Changes in Hemoglobin Function in High-Altitude Tibetan Canids Were 
Derived via Gene Conversion and Introgression.

Signore AV(1), Yang YZ(2), Yang QY(2), Qin G(2), Moriyama H(1), Ge RL(2), Storz 
JF(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
(2)Research Center for High Altitude Medicine, Qinghai University, Xining, 
China.

A key question in evolutionary biology concerns the relative importance of 
different sources of adaptive genetic variation, such as de novo mutations, 
standing variation, and introgressive hybridization. A corollary question 
concerns how allelic variants derived from these different sources may influence 
the molecular basis of phenotypic adaptation. Here, we use a protein-engineering 
approach to examine the phenotypic effect of putatively adaptive hemoglobin (Hb) 
mutations in the high-altitude Tibetan wolf that were selectively introgressed 
into the Tibetan mastiff, a high-altitude dog breed that is renowned for its 
hypoxia tolerance. Experiments revealed that the introgressed coding variants 
confer an increased Hb-O2 affinity in conjunction with an enhanced Bohr effect. 
We also document that affinity-enhancing mutations in the β-globin gene of 
Tibetan wolf were originally derived via interparalog gene conversion from a 
tandemly linked β-globin pseudogene. Thus, affinity-enhancing mutations were 
introduced into the β-globin gene of Tibetan wolf via one form of intragenomic 
lateral transfer (ectopic gene conversion) and were subsequently introduced into 
the Tibetan mastiff genome via a second form of lateral transfer 
(introgression). Site-directed mutagenesis experiments revealed that the 
increased Hb-O2 affinity requires a specific two-site combination of amino acid 
replacements, suggesting that the molecular underpinnings of Hb adaptation in 
Tibetan mastiff (involving mutations that arose in a nonexpressed gene and which 
originally fixed in Tibetan wolf) may be qualitatively distinct from 
functionally similar changes in protein function that could have evolved via 
sequential fixation of de novo mutations during the breed's relatively short 
duration of residency at high altitude.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz097
PMCID: PMC6759075
PMID: 31362306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1515. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2432-2450. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz173.

Transcriptional Enhancers in the FOXP2 Locus Underwent Accelerated Evolution in 
the Human Lineage.

Caporale AL(1), Gonda CM(1), Franchini LF(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular 
(INGEBI), Consejo de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.

Unique human features, such as complex language, are the result of molecular 
evolutionary changes that modified developmental programs of our brain. The 
human-specific evolution of the forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) gene-coding region has 
been linked to the emergence of speech and language in the human kind. However, 
little is known about how the expression of FOXP2 is regulated and whether its 
regulatory machinery evolved in a lineage-specific manner in humans. In order to 
identify FOXP2 regulatory regions containing human-specific changes, we used 
databases of human-accelerated noncoding sequences or HARs. We found that the 
topologically associating domain determined using developing human cerebral 
cortex containing the FOXP2 locus includes two clusters of 12 HARs, placing the 
locus occupied by FOXP2 among the top regions showing fast acceleration rates in 
noncoding regions in the human genome. Using in vivo enhancer assays in 
zebrafish, we found that at least five FOXP2-HARs behave as transcriptional 
enhancers throughout different developmental stages. In addition, we found that 
at least two FOXP2-HARs direct the expression of the reporter gene EGFP to 
foxP2-expressing regions and cells. Moreover, we uncovered two FOXP2-HARs 
showing reporter expression gain of function in the nervous system when compared 
with the chimpanzee ortholog sequences. Our results indicate that regulatory 
sequences in the FOXP2 locus underwent a human-specific evolutionary process 
suggesting that the transcriptional machinery controlling this gene could have 
also evolved differentially in the human lineage.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz173
PMID: 31359064


1516. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2714-2736. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz175.

From Root to Tips: Sporulation Evolution and Specialization in Bacillus subtilis 
and the Intestinal Pathogen Clostridioides difficile.

Ramos-Silva P(1)(2), Serrano M(3), Henriques AO(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
(2)Marine Biodiversity Group, Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Instituto de Tecnologia Química e Biológica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, 
Oeiras, Portugal.

Bacteria of the Firmicutes phylum are able to enter a developmental pathway that 
culminates with the formation of highly resistant, dormant endospores. 
Endospores allow environmental persistence, dissemination and for pathogens, are 
also infection vehicles. In both the model Bacillus subtilis, an aerobic 
organism, and in the intestinal pathogen Clostridioides difficile, an obligate 
anaerobe, sporulation mobilizes hundreds of genes. Their expression is 
coordinated between the forespore and the mother cell, the two cells that 
participate in the process, and is kept in close register with the course of 
morphogenesis. The evolutionary mechanisms by which sporulation emerged and 
evolved in these two species, and more broadly across Firmicutes, remain largely 
unknown. Here, we trace the origin and evolution of sporulation using the genes 
known to be involved in the process in B. subtilis and C. difficile, and 
estimating their gain-loss dynamics in a comprehensive bacterial 
macroevolutionary framework. We show that sporulation evolution was driven by 
two major gene gain events, the first at the base of the Firmicutes and the 
second at the base of the B. subtilis group and within the Peptostreptococcaceae 
family, which includes C. difficile. We also show that early and late 
sporulation regulons have been coevolving and that sporulation genes entail 
greater innovation in B. subtilis with many Bacilli lineage-restricted genes. In 
contrast, C. difficile more often recruits new sporulation genes by horizontal 
gene transfer, which reflects both its highly mobile genome, the complexity of 
the gut microbiota, and an adjustment of sporulation to the gut ecosystem.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz175
PMCID: PMC6878958
PMID: 31350897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1517. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2698-2713. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz174.

The Current Genomic Landscape of Western South America: Andes, Amazonia, and 
Pacific Coast.

Barbieri C(1)(2), Barquera R(3), Arias L(4), Sandoval JR(5), Acosta O(5), Zurita 
C(6)(7), Aguilar-Campos A(8), Tito-Álvarez AM(9), Serrano-Osuna R(8), Gray 
RD(1), Mafessoni F(4), Heggarty P(1), Shimizu KK(2), Fujita R(5), Stoneking 
M(4), Pugach I(4), Fehren-Schmitz L(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Linguistic and Cultural Evolution, Max Planck Institute for the 
Science of Human History, Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human 
History, Jena, Germany.
(4)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Centro de Investigación de Genética y Biología Molecular (CIGBM), Universidad 
de San Martín de Porres, Lima, Peru.
(6)Cátedra de Inmunología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Central del 
Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador.
(7)Zurita & Zurita Laboratorios, Unidad de Investigaciones en Biomedicina, 
Quito, Ecuador.
(8)Clinical Laboratory, Unidad Médica de Alta Especialidad (UMAE) # 2, Instituto 
Mexicano del Seguro Social (IMSS), Ciudad Obregón, Sonora, Mexico.
(9)Carrera de Enfermería, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Las 
Américas, Quito, Ecuador.
(10)UCSC Paleogenomics, Department of Anthropology, University of California, 
Santa Cruz, CA.
(11)Genomics Institute, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA.

Studies of Native South American genetic diversity have helped to shed light on 
the peopling and differentiation of the continent, but available data are sparse 
for the major ecogeographic domains. These include the Pacific Coast, a 
potential early migration route; the Andes, home to the most expansive complex 
societies and to one of the most widely spoken indigenous language families of 
the continent (Quechua); and Amazonia, with its understudied population 
structure and rich cultural diversity. Here, we explore the genetic structure of 
176 individuals from these three domains, genotyped with the Affymetrix Human 
Origins array. We infer multiple sources of ancestry within the Native American 
ancestry component; one with clear predominance on the Coast and in the Andes, 
and at least two distinct substrates in neighboring Amazonia, including a 
previously undetected ancestry characteristic of northern Ecuador and Colombia. 
Amazonian populations are also involved in recent gene-flow with each other and 
across ecogeographic domains, which does not accord with the traditional view of 
small, isolated groups. Long-distance genetic connections between speakers of 
the same language family suggest that indigenous languages here were spread not 
by cultural contact alone. Finally, Native American populations admixed with 
post-Columbian European and African sources at different times, with few cases 
of prolonged isolation. With our results we emphasize the importance of 
including understudied regions of the continent in high-resolution genetic 
studies, and we illustrate the potential of SNP chip arrays for informative 
regional-scale analysis.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz174
PMCID: PMC6878948
PMID: 31350885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1518. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2572-2590. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz169.

Population Gene Introgression and High Genome Plasticity for the Zoonotic 
Pathogen Streptococcus agalactiae.

Richards VP(1)(2), Velsko IM(2)(3), Alam MT(2)(4), Zadoks RN(5)(6), Manning 
SD(7), Pavinski Bitar PD(1), Hassler HB(2), Crestani C(5), Springer GH(2), 
Probert BM(2), Town CD(8), Stanhope MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Science, Clemson University, 
Clemson, SC.
(3)Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human 
History, Jena, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL.
(5)Pentlands Science Park, Moredun Research Institute, Penicuik, United Kingdom.
(6)Institute for Biodiversity, Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, College 
of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
E. Lansing, MI.
(8)J. Craig Venter Institute, Rockville, MD.

The influence that bacterial adaptation (or niche partitioning) within species 
has on gene spillover and transmission among bacterial populations occupying 
different niches is not well understood. Streptococcus agalactiae is an 
important bacterial pathogen that has a taxonomically diverse host range making 
it an excellent model system to study these processes. Here, we analyze a global 
set of 901 genome sequences from nine diverse host species to advance our 
understanding of these processes. Bayesian clustering analysis delineated 12 
major populations that closely aligned with niches. Comparative genomics 
revealed extensive gene gain/loss among populations and a large pan genome of 
9,527 genes, which remained open and was strongly partitioned among niches. As a 
result, the biochemical characteristics of 11 populations were highly 
distinctive (significantly enriched). Positive selection was detected and 
biochemical characteristics of the dispensable genes under selection were 
enriched in ten populations. Despite the strong gene partitioning, phylogenomics 
detected gene spillover. In particular, tetracycline resistance (which likely 
evolved in the human-associated population) from humans to bovine, canines, 
seals, and fish, demonstrating how a gene selected in one host can ultimately be 
transmitted into another, and biased transmission from humans to bovines was 
confirmed with a Bayesian migration analysis. Our findings show high bacterial 
genome plasticity acting in balance with selection pressure from distinct 
functional requirements of niches that is associated with an extensive and 
highly partitioned dispensable genome, likely facilitating continued and 
expansive adaptation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz169
PMCID: PMC6805230
PMID: 31350563


1519. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2682-2697. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz166.

Speciation in Howea Palms Occurred in Sympatry, Was Preceded by Ancestral 
Admixture, and Was Associated with Edaphic and Phenological Adaptation.

Osborne OG(1)(2), Ciezarek A(1), Wilson T(3), Crayn D(4), Hutton I(5), Baker 
WJ(6), Turnbull CGN(7), Savolainen V(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Silwood Park Campus, Imperial College London, 
Ascot, United Kingdom.
(2)Molecular Ecology and Fisheries Genetics Laboratory, School of Natural 
Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, United Kingdom.
(3)Royal Botanic Gardens Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(4)Australian Tropical Herbarium, James Cook University, Smithfield, QLD, 
Australia.
(5)Lord Howe Island Museum, Lord Howe Island, NSW, Australia.
(6)Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, Richmond, Surrey, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Life Sciences, South Kensington Campus, Imperial College 
London, London, United Kingdom.

Howea palms are viewed as one of the most clear-cut cases of speciation in 
sympatry. The sister species Howea belmoreana and H. forsteriana are endemic to 
the oceanic Lord Howe Island, Australia, where they have overlapping 
distributions and are reproductively isolated mainly by flowering time 
differences. However, the potential role of introgression from Australian 
mainland relatives had not previously been investigated, a process that has 
recently put other examples of sympatric speciation into question. Furthermore, 
the drivers of flowering time-based reproductive isolation remain unclear. We 
sequenced an RNA-seq data set that comprehensively sampled Howea and their 
closest mainland relatives (Linospadix, Laccospadix), and collected detailed 
soil chemistry data on Lord Howe Island to evaluate whether secondary gene flow 
had taken place and to examine the role of soil preference in speciation. 
D-statistics analyses strongly support a scenario whereby ancestral Howea 
hybridized frequently with its mainland relatives, but this only occurred prior 
to speciation. Expression analysis, population genetic and phylogenetic tests of 
selection, identified several flowering time genes with evidence of adaptive 
divergence between the Howea species. We found expression plasticity in 
flowering time genes in response to soil chemistry as well as adaptive 
expression and sequence divergence in genes pleiotropically linked to soil 
adaptation and flowering time. Ancestral hybridization may have provided the 
genetic diversity that promoted their subsequent adaptive divergence and 
speciation, a process that may be common for rapid ecological speciation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz166
PMID: 31318434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1520. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2171-2183. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz127.

Trehalase Gene as a Molecular Signature of Dietary Diversification in Mammals.

Jiao H(1), Zhang L(2), Xie HW(1)(2), Simmons NB(3), Liu H(2), Zhao H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Cell Homeostasis, College of 
Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(2)Guangdong Key Laboratory of Animal Conservation and Resource Utilization, 
Guangdong Public Laboratory of Wild Animal Conservation and Utilization, 
Guangdong Institute of Applied Biological Resources, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Mammalogy, American Museum of Natural History, New York, NY.

Diet is a key factor in determining and structuring animal diversity and 
adaptive radiations. The mammalian fossil record preserves phenotypic evidence 
of many dietary shifts, whereas genetic changes followed by dietary 
diversification in mammals remain largely unknown. To test whether living 
mammals preserve molecular evidence of dietary shifts, we examined the trehalase 
gene (Treh), which encodes an enzyme capable of digesting trehalose from insect 
blood, in bats and other mammals with diverse diets. Bats represent the largest 
dietary radiation among all mammalian orders, with independent origins of 
frugivory, nectarivory, carnivory, omnivory, and even sanguivory in an otherwise 
insectivorous clade. We found that Treh has been inactivated in unrelated bat 
lineages that independently radiated into noninsectivorous niches. Consistently, 
purifying selection has been markedly relaxed in noninsectivorous bats compared 
with their insectivorous relatives. Enzymatic assays of intestinal trehalase in 
bats suggest that trehalase activity tends to be lost or markedly reduced in 
noninsectivorous bats compared with their insectivorous relatives. Furthermore, 
our survey of Treh in 119 mammal species, which represent a deeper evolutionary 
timeframe, additionally identified a number of other independent losses of Treh 
in noninsectivorous species, recapitulating the evolutionary pattern that we 
found in bats. These results document a molecular record of dietary 
diversification in mammals, and suggest that such molecular signatures of 
dietary shifts would help us understand both historical and modern changes of 
animal diets.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz127
PMCID: PMC6759077
PMID: 31311032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1521. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2481-2497. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz161.

Admixture between Ancient Lineages, Selection, and the Formation of Sympatric 
Stickleback Species-Pairs.

Dean LL(1), Magalhaes IS(1)(2), Foote A(3), D'Agostino D(1), McGowan S(4), 
MacColl ADC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, Whitelands College, University of Roehampton, 
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Molecular Ecology and Fisheries Genetics Laboratory, Bangor University, 
Bangor, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Geography, The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United 
Kingdom.

Ecological speciation has become a popular model for the development and 
maintenance of reproductive isolation in closely related sympatric pairs of 
species or ecotypes. An implicit assumption has been that such pairs originate 
(possibly with gene flow) from a recent, genetically homogeneous ancestor. 
However, recent genomic data have revealed that currently sympatric taxa are 
often a result of secondary contact between ancestrally allopatric lineages. 
This has sparked an interest in the importance of initial hybridization upon 
secondary contact, with genomic reanalysis of classic examples of ecological 
speciation often implicating admixture in speciation. We describe a novel 
occurrence of unusually well-developed reproductive isolation in a model system 
for ecological speciation: the three-spined stickleback (Gasterosteus 
aculeatus), breeding sympatrically in multiple lagoons on the Scottish island of 
North Uist. Using morphological data, targeted genotyping, and genome-wide 
single-nucleotide polymorphism data, we show that lagoon resident and anadromous 
ecotypes are strongly reproductively isolated with an estimated hybridization 
rate of only ∼1%. We use palaeoecological and genetic data to test three 
hypotheses to explain the existence of these species-pairs. Our results suggest 
that recent, purely ecological speciation from a genetically homogeneous 
ancestor is probably not solely responsible for the evolution of species-pairs. 
Instead, we reveal a complex colonization history with multiple ancestral 
lineages contributing to the genetic composition of species-pairs, alongside 
strong disruptive selection. Our results imply a role for admixture upon 
secondary contact and are consistent with the recent suggestion that the genomic 
underpinning of ecological speciation often has an older, allopatric origin.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz161
PMCID: PMC6805233
PMID: 31297536


1522. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2536-2547. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz159.

De Novo Mutation Rate Estimation in Wolves of Known Pedigree.

Koch EM(1), Schweizer RM(2), Schweizer TM(3)(4), Stahler DR(5), Smith DW(5), 
Wayne RK(3), Novembre J(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(2)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, MT.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO.
(5)Yellowstone Center for Resources, National Park Service, Yellowstone National 
Park, WY.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Knowledge of mutation rates is crucial for calibrating population genetics 
models of demographic history in units of years. However, mutation rates remain 
challenging to estimate because of the need to identify extremely rare events. 
We estimated the nuclear mutation rate in wolves by identifying de novo 
mutations in a pedigree of seven wolves. Putative de novo mutations were 
discovered by whole-genome sequencing and were verified by Sanger sequencing of 
parents and offspring. Using stringent filters and an estimate of the false 
negative rate in the remaining observable genome, we obtain an estimate of ∼4.5 
× 10-9 per base pair per generation and provide conservative bounds between 2.6 
× 10-9 and 7.1 × 10-9. Although our estimate is consistent with recent mutation 
rate estimates from ancient DNA (4.0 × 10-9 and 3.0-4.5 × 10-9), it suggests a 
wider possible range. We also examined the consequences of our rate and the 
accompanying interval for dating several critical events in canid demographic 
history. For example, applying our full range of rates to coalescent models of 
dog and wolf demographic history implies a wide set of possible divergence times 
between the ancestral populations of dogs and extant Eurasian wolves 
(16,000-64,000 years ago) although our point estimate indicates a date between 
25,000 and 33,000 years ago. Aside from one study in mice, ours provides the 
only direct mammalian mutation rate outside of primates and is likely to be 
vital to future investigations of mutation rate evolution.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz159
PMCID: PMC6805234
PMID: 31297530


1523. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2668-2681. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz160.

Sex-Ratio Meiotic Drive Shapes the Evolution of the Y Chromosome in Drosophila 
simulans.

Helleu Q(1)(2), Courret C(1), Ogereau D(1), Burnham KL(1)(3), Chaminade N(1), 
Chakir M(4), Aulard S(1)(5), Montchamp-Moreau C(1).

Author information:
(1)Évolution Génomes Comportement et Ecologie, CNRS, IRD, Univ. Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(3)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Laboratoire Aliments, environnement et Santé, Faculté des Sciences et 
Techniques Université Cadi Ayyad, Marrakech, Morocco.
(5)Faculté des Sciences et Ingénierie, UFR des Sciences de la Vie, UPMC, 
Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.

The recent emergence and spread of X-linked segregation distorters-called 
"Paris" system-in the worldwide species Drosophila simulans has elicited the 
selection of drive-resistant Y chromosomes. Here, we investigate the 
evolutionary history of 386 Y chromosomes originating from 29 population samples 
collected over a period of 20 years, showing a wide continuum of phenotypes when 
tested against the Paris distorters, from high sensitivity to complete 
resistance (males sire ∼95% to ∼40% female progeny). Analyzing around 13 kb of 
Y-linked gene sequences in a representative subset of nine Y chromosomes, we 
identified only three polymorphic sites resulting in three haplotypes. 
Remarkably, one of the haplotypes is associated with resistance. This haplotype 
is fixed in all samples from Sub-Saharan Africa, the region of origin of the 
drivers. Exceptionally, with the spread of the drivers in Egypt and Morocco, we 
were able to record the replacement of the sensitive lineage by the resistant 
haplotype in real time, within only a few years. In addition, we performed in 
situ hybridization, using satellite DNA probes, on a subset of 21 Y chromosomes 
from six locations. In contrast to the low molecular polymorphism, this revealed 
extensive structural variation suggestive of rapid evolution, either neutral or 
adaptive. Moreover, our results show that intragenomic conflicts can drive 
astonishingly rapid replacement of Y chromosomes and suggest that the emergence 
of Paris segregation distorters in East Africa occurred less than half a century 
ago.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz160
PMID: 31290972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1524. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2252-2264. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz153.

Epimutations in Developmental Genes Underlie the Onset of Domestication in 
Farmed European Sea Bass.

Anastasiadi D(1)(2), Piferrer F(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Ciències del Mar, Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)The New Zealand Institute for Plant & Food Research, Nelson, New Zealand.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):610.

Domestication of wild animals induces a set of phenotypic characteristics 
collectively known as the domestication syndrome. However, how this syndrome 
emerges is still not clear. Recently, the neural crest cell deficit hypothesis 
proposed that it is generated by a mildly disrupted neural crest cell 
developmental program, but clear support is lacking due to the difficulties of 
distinguishing pure domestication effects from preexisting genetic differences 
between farmed and wild mammals and birds. Here, we use a farmed fish as model 
to investigate the role of persistent changes in DNA methylation (epimutations) 
in the process of domestication. We show that early domesticates of sea bass, 
with no genetic differences with wild counterparts, contain epimutations in 
tissues with different embryonic origins. About one fifth of epimutations that 
persist into adulthood are established by the time of gastrulation and affect 
genes involved in developmental processes that are expressed in embryonic 
structures, including the neural crest. Some of these genes are differentially 
expressed in sea bass with lower jaw malformations, a key feature of 
domestication syndrome. Interestingly, these epimutations significantly overlap 
with cytosine-to-thymine polymorphisms after 25 years of selective breeding. 
Furthermore, epimutated genes coincide with genes under positive selection in 
other domesticates. We argue that the initial stages of domestication include 
dynamic alterations in DNA methylation of developmental genes that affect the 
neural crest. Our results indicate a role for epimutations during the beginning 
of domestication that could be fixed as genetic variants and suggest a conserved 
molecular process to explain Darwin's domestication syndrome across vertebrates.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz153
PMCID: PMC6759067
PMID: 31289822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1525. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1849-1861. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz089.

Genetic Affinities among Southern Africa Hunter-Gatherers and the Impact of 
Admixing Farmer and Herder Populations.

Vicente M(1), Jakobsson M(1)(2)(3), Ebbesen P(4), Schlebusch CM(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Human Evolution, Department of Organismal Biology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Palaeo-Research Institute, University of Johannesburg, Auckland Park, South 
Africa.
(3)SciLifeLab, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Health Science and Technology, University of Aalborg, Aalborg, 
Denmark.

Southern African indigenous groups, traditionally hunter-gatherers (San) and 
herders (Khoekhoe), are commonly referred to as "Khoe-San" populations and have 
a long history in southern Africa. Their ancestors were largely isolated up 
until ∼2,000 years ago before the arrival of pastoralists and farmers in 
southern Africa. Assessing relationships among regional Khoe-San groups has been 
challenging due to admixture with immigrant populations that obscure past 
population affinities and gene flow among these autochthonous communities. We 
re-evaluate a combined genome-wide data set of previously published southern 
Africa Khoe-San populations in conjunction with novel data from Khoe-San 
individuals collected in Xade (Central Kalahari Game Reserve, Botswana) prior to 
their resettlement outside the reserve. After excluding regions in the genome 
that trace their ancestry to recent migrant groups, the genetic diversity of 20 
Khoe-San groups fitted an isolation-by-distance model. Even though 
isolation-by-distance explained most genetic affinities between the different 
autochthonous groups, additional signals of contact between Khoe-San groups 
could be detected. For instance, we found stronger genetic affinities, than what 
would be explained by isolation-by-distance gene flow, between the two 
geographically separated Khoe-San groups, who speak branches of the 
Kx'a-language family (ǂHoan and Ju). We also scanned the genome-wide data for 
signals of adaptive gene flow from farmers/herders into Khoe-San groups and 
identified a number of genomic regions potentially introduced by the arrival of 
the new groups. This study provides a comprehensive picture of affinities among 
Khoe-San groups, prior to the arrival of recent migrants, and found that these 
affinities are primarily determined by the geographic landscape.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz089
PMCID: PMC6735883
PMID: 31288264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1526. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2512-2521. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz152.

Coevolution of Sites under Immune Selection Shapes Epstein-Barr Virus Population 
Structure.

Wegner F(1)(2), Lassalle F(3)(4), Depledge DP(1)(5), Balloux F(3), Breuer J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection & Immunity, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Microbial Evolutionary Genomics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)MRC Centre for Outbreak Analysis and Modelling, Imperial College, London, 
United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Microbiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is one of the most common viral infections in humans 
and persists within its host for life. EBV therefore represents an extremely 
successful virus that has evolved complex strategies to evade the host's innate 
and adaptive immune response during both initial and persistent stages of 
infection. Here, we conducted a comparative genomics analysis on 223 whole 
genome sequences of worldwide EBV strains. We recover extensive genome-wide 
linkage disequilibrium (LD) despite pervasive genetic recombination. This 
pattern is explained by the global EBV population being subdivided into three 
main subpopulations, one primarily found in East Asia, one in Southeast Asia and 
Oceania, and the third including most of the other globally distributed genomes 
we analyzed. Additionally, sites in LD were overrepresented in immunogenic 
genes. Taken together, our results suggest that host immune selection and local 
adaptation to different human host populations has shaped the genome-wide 
patterns of genetic diversity in EBV.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz152
PMCID: PMC6805225
PMID: 31273385


1527. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2415-2431. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz156.

High Satellite Repeat Turnover in Great Apes Studied with Short- and Long-Read 
Technologies.

Cechova M(1), Harris RS(1), Tomaszkiewicz M(1), Arbeithuber B(1), Chiaromonte 
F(2)(3)(4), Makova KD(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(2)Department of Statistics, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
(3)EMbeDS, Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Center for Medical Genomics, Penn State, University Park, PA.

Satellite repeats are a structural component of centromeres and telomeres, and 
in some instances, their divergence is known to drive speciation. Due to their 
highly repetitive nature, satellite sequences have been understudied and 
underrepresented in genome assemblies. To investigate their turnover in great 
apes, we studied satellite repeats of unit sizes up to 50 bp in human, 
chimpanzee, bonobo, gorilla, and Sumatran and Bornean orangutans, using 
unassembled short and long sequencing reads. The density of satellite repeats, 
as identified from accurate short reads (Illumina), varied greatly among great 
ape genomes. These were dominated by a handful of abundant repeated motifs, 
frequently shared among species, which formed two groups: 1) the (AATGG)n repeat 
(critical for heat shock response) and its derivatives; and 2) subtelomeric 
32-mers involved in telomeric metabolism. Using the densities of abundant 
repeats, individuals could be classified into species. However, clustering did 
not reproduce the accepted species phylogeny, suggesting rapid repeat evolution. 
Several abundant repeats were enriched in males versus females; using Y 
chromosome assemblies or Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization, we validated their 
location on the Y. Finally, applying a novel computational tool, we identified 
many satellite repeats completely embedded within long Oxford Nanopore and 
Pacific Biosciences reads. Such repeats were up to 59 kb in length and consisted 
of perfect repeats interspersed with other similar sequences. Our results based 
on sequencing reads generated with three different technologies provide the 
first detailed characterization of great ape satellite repeats, and open new 
avenues for exploring their functions.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz156
PMCID: PMC6805231
PMID: 31273383


1528. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2591-2603. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz158.

EPAS1 Gain-of-Function Mutation Contributes to High-Altitude Adaptation in 
Tibetan Horses.

Liu X(1)(2), Zhang Y(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Pan J(1)(2), Wang D(1)(2), Chen W(3), 
Zheng Z(3), He X(1)(2), Zhao Q(1)(2), Pu Y(1)(2), Guan W(1)(2), Han J(2)(4), 
Orlando L(5)(6), Ma Y(1)(2), Jiang L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Animal (Poultry) Genetics Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry 
of Agriculture, Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences (CAAS), Beijing, PR China.
(2)CAAS-ILRI Joint Laboratory on Livestock and Forage Genetic Resources, 
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), 
Beijing, PR China.
(3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, PR China.
(4)International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), Nairobi, Kenya.
(5)Lundbeck Foundation GeoGenetics Center, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Laboratoire d'Anthropobiologie Moléculaire et d'Imagerie de Synthèse, CNRS, 
UMR 5288, Université Paul Sabatier (UPS), Toulouse, France.

High altitude represents some of the most extreme environments worldwide. The 
genetic changes underlying adaptation to such environments have been recently 
identified in multiple animals but remain unknown in horses. Here, we sequence 
the complete genome of 138 domestic horses encompassing a whole altitudinal 
range across China to uncover the genetic basis for adaptation to high-altitude 
hypoxia. Our genome data set includes 65 lowland animals across ten Chinese 
native breeds, 61 horses living at least 3,300 m above sea level across seven 
locations along Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, as well as 7 Thoroughbred and 5 
Przewalski's horses added for comparison. We find that Tibetan horses do not 
descend from Przewalski's horses but were most likely introduced from a distinct 
horse lineage, following the emergence of pastoral nomadism in Northwestern 
China ∼3,700 years ago. We identify that the endothelial PAS domain protein 1 
gene (EPAS1, also HIF2A) shows the strongest signature for positive selection in 
the Tibetan horse genome. Two missense mutations at this locus appear strongly 
associated with blood physiological parameters facilitating blood circulation as 
well as oxygen transportation and consumption in hypoxic conditions. Functional 
validation through protein mutagenesis shows that these mutations increase EPAS1 
stability and its hetero dimerization affinity to ARNT (HIF1B). Our study 
demonstrates that missense mutations in the EPAS1 gene provided key evolutionary 
molecular adaptation to Tibetan horses living in high-altitude hypoxic 
environments. It reveals possible targets for genomic selection programs aimed 
at increasing hypoxia tolerance in livestock and provides a textbook example of 
evolutionary convergence across independent mammal lineages.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz158
PMCID: PMC6805228
PMID: 31273382


1529. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2265-2276. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz145.

Skeletal Mineralization in Association with Type X Collagen Expression Is an 
Ancestral Feature for Jawed Vertebrates.

Debiais-Thibaud M(1), Simion P(1), Ventéo S(2), Muñoz D(3), Marcellini S(3), 
Mazan S(4), Haitina T(5).

Author information:
(1)ISEM, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, EPHE, Montpellier, France.
(2)The Neuroscience Institute of Montpellier, Inserm UMR1051, University of 
Montpellier, Saint Eloi Hospital, Montpellier, France.
(3)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Universidad de 
Concepción, Concepción, Chile.
(4)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC, CNRS UMR7232 Biologie Intégrative des Organismes 
Marins, Observatoire Océanologique, Banyuls-sur-Mer, France.
(5)Department of Organismal Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

In order to characterize the molecular bases of mineralizing cell evolution, we 
targeted type X collagen, a nonfibrillar network forming collagen encoded by the 
Col10a1 gene. It is involved in the process of endochondral ossification in 
ray-finned fishes and tetrapods (Osteichthyes), but until now unknown in 
cartilaginous fishes (Chondrichthyes). We show that holocephalans and 
elasmobranchs have respectively five and six tandemly duplicated Col10a1 gene 
copies that display conserved genomic synteny with osteichthyan Col10a1 genes. 
All Col10a1 genes in the catshark Scyliorhinus canicula are expressed in 
ameloblasts and/or odontoblasts of teeth and scales, during the stages of 
extracellular matrix protein secretion and mineralization. Only one duplicate is 
expressed in the endoskeletal (vertebral) mineralizing tissues. We also show 
that the expression of type X collagen is present in teeth of two osteichthyans, 
the zebrafish Danio rerio and the western clawed frog Xenopus tropicalis, 
indicating an ancestral jawed vertebrate involvement of type X collagen in 
odontode formation. Our findings push the origin of Col10a1 gene prior to the 
divergence of osteichthyans and chondrichthyans, and demonstrate its ancestral 
association with mineralization of both the odontode skeleton and the 
endoskeleton.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz145
PMCID: PMC6759074
PMID: 31270539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1530. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2195-2204. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz140.

Recurrent Losses and Rapid Evolution of the Condensin II Complex in Insects.

King TD(1), Leonard CJ(1), Cooper JC(1), Nguyen S(2), Joyce EF(2), Phadnis N(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(2)Department of Genetics, Penn Epigenetics Institute, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Condensins play a crucial role in the organization of genetic material by 
compacting and disentangling chromosomes. Based on studies in a few model 
organisms, the condensins I and II complexes are considered to have distinct 
functions, with the condensin II complex playing a role in meiosis and somatic 
pairing of homologous chromosomes in Drosophila. Intriguingly, the Cap-G2 
subunit of condensin II is absent in Drosophila melanogaster, and this loss may 
be related to the high levels of chromosome pairing seen in flies. Here, we find 
that all three non-SMC subunits of condensin II (Cap-G2, Cap-D3, and Cap-H2) 
have been repeatedly and independently lost in taxa representing multiple insect 
orders, with some taxa lacking all three. We also find that all non-Dipteran 
insects display near-uniform low-pairing levels regardless of their condensin II 
complex composition, suggesting that some key aspects of genome organization are 
robust to condensin II subunit losses. Finally, we observe consistent signatures 
of positive selection in condensin subunits across flies and mammals. These 
findings suggest that these ancient complexes are far more evolutionarily labile 
than previously suspected, and are at the crossroads of several forms of genomic 
conflicts. Our results raise fundamental questions about the specific functions 
of the two condensin complexes in taxa that have experienced subunit losses, and 
open the door to further investigations to elucidate the diversity of molecular 
mechanisms that underlie genome organization across various life forms.

The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz140
PMCID: PMC6759200
PMID: 31270536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1531. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2522-2535. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz157.

Meta-Omics Reveals Genetic Flexibility of Diatom Nitrogen Transporters in 
Response to Environmental Changes.

Busseni G(1), Rocha Jimenez Vieira F(2), Amato A(3), Pelletier E(4)(5), Pierella 
Karlusich JJ(2), Ferrante MI(1), Wincker P(4)(5), Rogato A(1)(6), Bowler C(2), 
Sanges R(1)(7), Maiorano L(1)(8), Chiurazzi M(6), Ribera d'Alcalà M(1), Caputi 
L(1), Iudicone D(1).

Author information:
(1)Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, Naples, Italy.
(2)Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure (IBENS), Ecole Normale 
Supérieure, CNRS, INSERM, PSL Université Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire et Végétale, Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, 
INRA, CNRS. BIG, Grenoble Cedex 9, France.
(4)Génomique Métabolique, Genoscope, Institut François Jacob, CEA, CNRS, Univ 
Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.
(5)FR2022/Tara Oceans-GOSEE, Paris, France.
(6)Institute of Biosciences and BioResources, CNR, Naples, Italy.
(7)Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Avanzati (SISSA), Trieste, Italy.
(8)Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie "Charles Darwin", Università di Roma 
"La Sapienza", Roma, Italy.

Diatoms (Bacillariophyta), one of the most abundant and diverse groups of marine 
phytoplankton, respond rapidly to the supply of new nutrients, often 
out-competing other phytoplankton. Herein, we integrated analyses of the 
evolution, distribution, and expression modulation of two gene families involved 
in diatom nitrogen uptake (DiAMT1 and DiNRT2), in order to infer the main 
drivers of divergence in a key functional trait of phytoplankton. Our results 
suggest that major steps in the evolution of the two gene families reflected key 
events triggering diatom radiation and diversification. Their expression is 
modulated in the contemporary ocean by seawater temperature, nitrate, and iron 
concentrations. Moreover, the differences in diversity and expression of these 
gene families throughout the water column hint at a possible link with bacterial 
activity. This study represents a proof-of-concept of how a holistic approach 
may shed light on the functional biology of organisms in their natural 
environment.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz157
PMCID: PMC6805229
PMID: 31259367


1532. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2127-2142. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz154.

Ancient Hybridization and Adaptive Introgression of an Invadolysin Gene in 
Schistosome Parasites.

Platt RN(1), McDew-White M(1), Le Clec'h W(1), Chevalier FD(1), Allan F(2)(3), 
Emery AM(2)(3), Garba A(4), Hamidou AA(4), Ame SM(5), Webster JP(3)(6), 
Rollinson D(2)(3), Webster BL(2)(3), Anderson TJC(1).

Author information:
(1)Disease Intervention and Prevention, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San 
Antonio, TX.
(2)Department of Life Sciences, The Natural History Museum, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)London Centre for Neglected Tropical Disease Research (LCNTDR), Imperial 
College London, St Mary's Campus, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Réseau International Schistosomoses, Environnement, Aménagement et Lutte 
(RISEAL-Niger), Niamey, Niger.
(5)Public Health Laboratory - Ivo de Carneri, Pemba, United Republic of 
Tanzania.
(6)Centre for Emerging, Endemic and Exotic Diseases, Department of Pathobiology 
and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College, University of London, London, 
United Kingdom.

Introgression among parasite species has the potential to transfer traits of 
biomedical importance across species boundaries. The parasitic blood fluke 
Schistosoma haematobium causes urogenital schistosomiasis in humans across 
sub-Saharan Africa. Hybridization with other schistosome species is assumed to 
occur commonly, because genetic crosses between S. haematobium and livestock 
schistosomes, including S. bovis, can be staged in the laboratory, and 
sequencing of mtDNA and rDNA amplified from microscopic miracidia larvae 
frequently reveals markers from different species. However, the frequency, 
direction, age, and genomic consequences of hybridization are unknown. We 
hatched miracidia from eggs and sequenced the exomes from 96 individual S. 
haematobium miracidia from infected patients from Niger and the Zanzibar 
archipelago. These data revealed no evidence for contemporary hybridization 
between S. bovis and S. haematobium in our samples. However, all Nigerien S. 
haematobium genomes sampled show hybrid ancestry, with 3.3-8.2% of their nuclear 
genomes derived from S. bovis, providing evidence of an ancient introgression 
event that occurred at least 108-613 generations ago. Some S. bovis-derived 
alleles have spread to high frequency or reached fixation and show strong 
signatures of directional selection; the strongest signal spans a single gene in 
the invadolysin gene family (Chr. 4). Our results suggest that S. bovis/S. 
haematobium hybridization occurs rarely but demonstrate profound consequences of 
ancient introgression from a livestock parasite into the genome of S. 
haematobium, the most prevalent schistosome species infecting humans.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz154
PMCID: PMC6759076
PMID: 31251352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1533. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2400-2414. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz155.

Parallel Evolution of HIV-1 in a Long-Term Experiment.

Bertels F(1)(2), Leemann C(3)(4), Metzner KJ(3)(4), Regoes RR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Systems Sciences, Institute of Integrative 
Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Microbial Population Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for 
Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University 
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Insitute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

One of the most intriguing puzzles in biology is the degree to which evolution 
is repeatable. The repeatability of evolution, or parallel evolution, has been 
studied in a variety of model systems, but has rarely been investigated with 
clinically relevant viruses. To investigate parallel evolution of HIV-1, we 
passaged two replicate HIV-1 populations for almost 1 year in each of two human 
T-cell lines. For each of the four evolution lines, we determined the genetic 
composition of the viral population at nine time points by deep sequencing the 
entire genome. Mutations that were carried by the majority of the viral 
population accumulated continuously over 1 year in each evolution line. Many 
majority mutations appeared in more than one evolution line, that is, our 
experiments showed an extreme degree of parallel evolution. In one of the 
evolution lines, 62% of the majority mutations also occur in another line. The 
parallelism impairs our ability to reconstruct the evolutionary history by 
phylogenetic methods. We show that one can infer the correct phylogenetic 
topology by including minority mutations in our analysis. We also find that 
mutation diversity at the beginning of the experiment is predictive of the 
frequency of majority mutations at the end of the experiment.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz155
PMCID: PMC6805227
PMID: 31251344


1534. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2313-2327. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz148.

Mutational and Selective Processes Involved in Evolution during Bacterial Range 
Expansions.

Bosshard L(1)(2), Peischl S(2)(3), Ackermann M(4)(5), Excoffier L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CMPG, Institute of Ecology an Evolution, University of Berne, Berne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Interfaculty Bioinformatics Unit, University of Berne, Berne, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Biogeochemistry and Pollutant Dynamics, Swiss Federal Institute 
of Technology Zurich (ETH Zürich), Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Environmental Microbiology, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic 
Science and Technology (Eawag), Dübendorf, Switzerland.

Bacterial populations have been shown to accumulate deleterious mutations during 
spatial expansions that overall decrease their fitness and ability to grow. 
However, it is unclear if and how they can respond to selection in face of this 
mutation load. We examine here if artificial selection can counteract the 
negative effects of range expansions. We examined the molecular evolution of 20 
mutator lines selected for fast expansions (SEL) and compared them to 20 other 
mutator lines freely expanding without artificial selection (CONTROL). We find 
that the colony size of all 20 SEL lines have increased relative to the 
ancestral lines, unlike CONTROL lines, showing that enough beneficial mutations 
are produced during spatial expansions to counteract the negative effect of 
expansion load. Importantly, SEL and CONTROL lines have similar numbers of 
mutations indicating that they evolved for the same number of generations and 
that increased fitness is not due to a purging of deleterious mutations. We find 
that loss of function mutations better explain the increased colony size of SEL 
lines than nonsynonymous mutations or a combination of the two. Interestingly, 
most loss of function mutations are found in simple sequence repeats (SSRs) 
located in genes involved in gene regulation and gene expression. We postulate 
that such potentially reversible mutations could play a major role in the rapid 
adaptation of bacteria to changing environmental conditions by shutting down 
expensive genes and adjusting gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz148
PMID: 31241150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1535. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2157-2164. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz150.

Advances and Applications in the Quest for Orthologs.

Glover N(1)(2)(3), Dessimoz C(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Ebersberger I(6)(7)(8), Forslund 
SK(9)(10)(11)(12)(13), Gabaldón T(14)(15)(16), Huerta-Cepas J(13)(17), Martin 
MJ(18), Muffato M(18), Patricio M(18), Pereira C(19)(20), da Silva AS(18), Wang 
Y(21), Sonnhammer E(22), Thomas PD(23).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Genetics, Evolution & Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Applied Bioinformatics Group, Institute of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, 
Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(7)Senckenberg Biodiversity and Climate Research Centre (BIK-F), Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(8)LOEWE Centre for Translational Biodiversity Genomics (LOEWE-TBG), Frankfurt, 
Germany.
(9)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, A Cooperation of 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbruck Center for Molecular 
Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
(10)Max Delbruck Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, 
Berlin, Germany.
(11)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität u Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(12)Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.
(13)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(15)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(16)ICREA, Barcelona, Spain.
(17)Centro de Biotecnología y Genómica de Plantas, Instituto Nacional de 
Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), Universidad Politécnica 
de Madrid (UPM), Madrid, Spain.
(18)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(19)Eura Nova, Marseille, France.
(20)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute for Food and 
Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(21)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, Institute for Integrative 
Genome Biology, University of California-Riverside, Riverside, CA.
(22)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
Stockholm University, Solna, Sweden.
(23)Division of Bioinformatics, Department of Preventive Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA.

Gene families evolve by the processes of speciation (creating orthologs), gene 
duplication (paralogs), and horizontal gene transfer (xenologs), in addition to 
sequence divergence and gene loss. Orthologs in particular play an essential 
role in comparative genomics and phylogenomic analyses. With the continued 
sequencing of organisms across the tree of life, the data are available to 
reconstruct the unique evolutionary histories of tens of thousands of gene 
families. Accurate reconstruction of these histories, however, is a challenging 
computational problem, and the focus of the Quest for Orthologs Consortium. We 
review the recent advances and outstanding challenges in this field, as revealed 
at a symposium and meeting held at the University of Southern California in 
2017. Key advances have been made both at the level of orthology algorithm 
development and with respect to coordination across the community of algorithm 
developers and orthology end-users. Applications spanned a broad range, 
including gene function prediction, phylostratigraphy, genome evolution, and 
phylogenomics. The meetings highlighted the increasing use of meta-analyses 
integrating results from multiple different algorithms, and discussed ongoing 
challenges in orthology inference as well as the next steps toward improvement 
and integration of orthology resources.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz150
PMCID: PMC6759064
PMID: 31241141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1536. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1921-1930. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz115.

Multiple Independent Recruitment of Sodefrin Precursor-Like Factors in Anuran 
Sexually Dimorphic Glands.

Bossuyt F(1), Schulte LM(1)(2), Maex M(1), Janssenswillen S(1), Novikova PY(3), 
Biju SD(4), Van de Peer Y(3), Matthijs S(1), Roelants K(1), Martel A(5), Van 
Bocxlaer I(1).

Author information:
(1)Amphibian Evolution Lab, Biology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Department of Wildlife-/Zoo-Animal-Biology and Systematics, Faculty of 
Biological Sciences, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(3)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Center for Plant 
Systems Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Systematics Lab, Department of Environmental Studies, University of Delhi, 
Delhi, India.
(5)Wildlife Health Ghent, Department of Pathology, Bacteriology, and Avian 
Diseases, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.

Chemical signaling in animals often plays a central role in eliciting a variety 
of responses during reproductive interactions between males and females. One of 
the best-known vertebrate courtship pheromone systems is sodefrin precursor-like 
factors (SPFs), a family of two-domain three-finger proteins with a 
female-receptivity enhancing function, currently only known from salamanders. 
The oldest divergence between active components in a single salamander species 
dates back to the Late Paleozoic, indicating that these proteins potentially 
gained a pheromone function earlier in amphibian evolution. Here, we combined 
whole transcriptome sequencing, proteomics, histology, and molecular 
phylogenetics in a comparative approach to investigate SPF occurrence in male 
breeding glands across the evolutionary tree of anurans (frogs and toads). Our 
study shows that multiple families of both terrestrially and aquatically 
reproducing frogs have substantially increased expression levels of SPFs in male 
breeding glands. This suggests that multiple anuran lineages make use of SPFs to 
complement acoustic and visual sexual signaling during courtship. Comparative 
analyses show that anurans independently recruited these proteins each time the 
gland location on the male's body allowed efficient transmission of the 
secretion to the female's nares.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz115
PMID: 31238339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1537. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2557-2571. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz149.

Genomic Patterns of Local Adaptation under Gene Flow in Arabidopsis lyrata.

Hämälä T(1)(2)(3), Savolainen O(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(2)Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(3)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, 
MN.

Short-scale local adaptation is a complex process involving selection, 
migration, and drift. The expected effects on the genome are well grounded in 
theory but examining these on an empirical level has proven difficult, as it 
requires information about local selection, demographic history, and 
recombination rate variation. Here, we use locally adapted and phenotypically 
differentiated Arabidopsis lyrata populations from two altitudinal gradients in 
Norway to test these expectations at the whole-genome level. Demography modeling 
indicates that populations within the gradients diverged <2 kya and that the 
sites are connected by gene flow. The gene flow estimates are, however, highly 
asymmetric with migration from high to low altitudes being several times more 
frequent than vice versa. To detect signatures of selection for local 
adaptation, we estimate patterns of lineage-specific differentiation among these 
populations. Theory predicts that gene flow leads to concentration of adaptive 
loci in areas of low recombination; a pattern we observe in both lowland-alpine 
comparisons. Although most selected loci display patterns of conditional 
neutrality, we found indications of genetic trade-offs, with one locus 
particularly showing high differentiation and signs of selection in both 
populations. Our results further suggest that resistance to solar radiation is 
an important adaptation to alpine environments, while vegetative growth and 
bacterial defense are indicated as selected traits in the lowland habitats. 
These results provide insights into genetic architectures and evolutionary 
processes driving local adaptation under gene flow. We also contribute to 
understanding of traits and biological processes underlying alpine adaptation in 
northern latitudes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz149
PMID: 31236594


1538. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2462-2480. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz151.

Symbiosis, Selection, and Novelty: Freshwater Adaptation in the Unique Sponges 
of Lake Baikal.

Kenny NJ(1), Plese B(1)(2), Riesgo A(1), Itskovich VB(3).

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Department, The Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Division of Molecular Biology, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Limnological Institute, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Science, 
Irkutsk, Russia.

Freshwater sponges (Spongillida) are a unique lineage of demosponges that 
secondarily colonized lakes and rivers and are now found ubiquitously in these 
ecosystems. They developed specific adaptations to freshwater systems, including 
the ability to survive extreme thermal ranges, long-lasting dessication, anoxia, 
and resistance to a variety of pollutants. Although spongillids have colonized 
all freshwater systems, the family Lubomirskiidae is endemic to Lake Baikal and 
plays a range of key roles in this ecosystem. Our work compares the genomic 
content and microbiome of individuals of three species of the Lubomirskiidae, 
providing hypotheses for how molecular evolution has allowed them to adapt to 
their unique environments. We have sequenced deep (>92% of the metazoan 
"Benchmarking Universal Single-Copy Orthologs" [BUSCO] set) transcriptomes from 
three species of Lubomirskiidae and a draft genome resource for Lubomirskia 
baikalensis. We note Baikal sponges contain unicellular algal and bacterial 
symbionts, as well as the dinoflagellate Gyrodinium. We investigated molecular 
evolution, gene duplication, and novelty in freshwater sponges compared with 
marine lineages. Sixty one orthogroups have consilient evidence of positive 
selection. Transporters (e.g., zinc transporter-2), transcription factors 
(aristaless-related homeobox), and structural proteins (e.g. actin-3), alongside 
other genes, are under strong evolutionary pressure in freshwater, with 
duplication driving novelty across the Spongillida, but especially in the 
Lubomirskiidae. This addition to knowledge of freshwater sponge genetics 
provides a range of tools for understanding the molecular biology and, in the 
future, the ecology (e.g., colonization and migration patterns) of these key 
species.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz151
PMCID: PMC6805232
PMID: 31236592


1539. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2105-2110. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz146.

Horizontal Transfer of Bacterial Cytolethal Distending Toxin B Genes to Insects.

Verster KI(1), Wisecaver JH(2), Karageorgi M(1), Duncan RP(1), Gloss AD(3), 
Armstrong EE(4), Price DK(5), Menon AR(1), Ali ZM(1), Whiteman NK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(4)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA.
(5)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV.

Horizontal gene transfer events have played a major role in the evolution of 
microbial species, but their importance in animals is less clear. Here, we 
report horizontal gene transfer of cytolethal distending toxin B (cdtB), 
prokaryotic genes encoding eukaryote-targeting DNase I toxins, into the genomes 
of vinegar flies (Diptera: Drosophilidae) and aphids (Hemiptera: Aphididae). We 
found insect-encoded cdtB genes are most closely related to orthologs from 
bacteriophage that infect Candidatus Hamiltonella defensa, a bacterial 
mutualistic symbiont of aphids that confers resistance to parasitoid wasps. In 
drosophilids, cdtB orthologs are highly expressed during the parasitoid-prone 
larval stage and encode a protein with ancestral DNase activity. We show that 
cdtB has been domesticated by diverse insects and hypothesize that it functions 
in defense against their natural enemies.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz146
PMCID: PMC6759069
PMID: 31236589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1540. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2238-2251. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz144.

Antibiotic Resistance Evolution Is Contingent on the Quorum-Sensing Response in 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Hernando-Amado S(1), Sanz-García F(1), Martínez JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.

Different works have explored independently the evolution toward antibiotic 
resistance and the role of eco-adaptive mutations in the adaptation to a new 
habitat (as the infected host) of bacterial pathogens. However, knowledge about 
the connection between both processes is still limited. We address this issue by 
comparing the evolutionary trajectories toward antibiotic resistance of a 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa lasR defective mutant and its parental wild-type strain, 
when growing in presence of two ribosome-targeting antibiotics. Quorum-sensing 
lasR defective mutants are selected in P. aeruginosa populations causing chronic 
infections. Further, we observed they are also selected in vitro as a first 
adaptation for growing in culture medium. By using experimental evolution and 
whole-genome sequencing, we found that the evolutionary trajectories of P. 
aeruginosa in presence of these antibiotics are different in lasR defective and 
in wild-type backgrounds, both at the phenotypic and the genotypic levels. 
Recreation of a set of mutants in both genomic backgrounds (either wild type or 
lasR defective) allowed us to determine the existence of negative epistatic 
interactions between lasR and antibiotic resistance determinants. These 
epistatic interactions could lead to mutual contingency in the evolution of 
antibiotic resistance when P. aeruginosa colonizes a new habitat in presence of 
antibiotics. If lasR mutants are selected first, this would constraint 
antibiotic resistance evolution. Conversely, when resistance mutations (at least 
those studied in the present work) are selected, lasR mutants may not be 
selected in presence of antibiotics. These results underlie the importance of 
contingency and epistatic interactions in modulating antibiotic resistance 
evolution.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz144
PMID: 31228244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1541. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1975-1989. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz126.

Ancestral Admixture Is the Main Determinant of Global Biodiversity in Fission 
Yeast.

Tusso S(1)(2), Nieuwenhuis BPS(1), Sedlazeck FJ(3), Davey JW(4), Jeffares 
DC(5)(6), Wolf JBW(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Evolutionary Biology, Faculty of Biology, LMU Munich, 
Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Biology, Science for Life Laboratories, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(4)Bioscience Technology Facility, Department of Biology, University of York, 
York, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Biology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.
(6)York Biomedical Research Institute (YBRI), University of York, York, United 
Kingdom.

Mutation and recombination are key evolutionary processes governing phenotypic 
variation and reproductive isolation. We here demonstrate that biodiversity 
within all globally known strains of Schizosaccharomyces pombe arose through 
admixture between two divergent ancestral lineages. Initial hybridization was 
inferred to have occurred ∼20-60 sexual outcrossing generations ago consistent 
with recent, human-induced migration at the onset of intensified 
transcontinental trade. Species-wide heritable phenotypic variation was 
explained near-exclusively by strain-specific arrangements of alternating 
ancestry components with evidence for transgressive segregation. Reproductive 
compatibility between strains was likewise predicted by the degree of shared 
ancestry. To assess the genetic determinants of ancestry block distribution 
across the genome, we characterized the type, frequency, and position of 
structural genomic variation using nanopore and single-molecule real-time 
sequencing. Despite being associated with double-strand break initiation points, 
over 800 segregating structural variants exerted overall little influence on the 
introgression landscape or on reproductive compatibility between strains. In 
contrast, we found strong ancestry disequilibrium consistent with negative 
epistatic selection shaping genomic ancestry combinations during the course of 
hybridization. This study provides a detailed, experimentally tractable example 
that genomes of natural populations are mosaics reflecting different 
evolutionary histories. Exploiting genome-wide heterogeneity in the history of 
ancestral recombination and lineage-specific mutations sheds new light on the 
population history of S. pombe and highlights the importance of hybridization as 
a creative force in generating biodiversity.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz126
PMCID: PMC6736153
PMID: 31225876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1542. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2328-2339. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz124.

Elucidation of Codon Usage Signatures across the Domains of Life.

Novoa EM(1)(2)(3)(4), Jungreis I(1)(2), Jaillon O(1)(2)(5), Kellis M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia.
(4)University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(5)Génomique Métabolique, Genoscope, Institut François Jacob, CEA, CNRS, Univ 
Evry, Université Paris-Saclay, Evry, France.

Because of the degeneracy of the genetic code, multiple codons are translated 
into the same amino acid. Despite being "synonymous," these codons are not 
equally used. Selective pressures are thought to drive the choice among 
synonymous codons within a genome, while GC content, which is typically 
attributed to mutational drift, is the major determinant of variation across 
species. Here, we find that in addition to GC content, interspecies codon usage 
signatures can also be detected. More specifically, we show that a single amino 
acid, arginine, is the major contributor to codon usage bias differences across 
domains of life. We then exploit this finding and show that domain-specific 
codon bias signatures can be used to classify a given sequence into its 
corresponding domain of life with high accuracy. We then wondered whether the 
inclusion of codon usage codon autocorrelation patterns, which reflects the 
nonrandom distribution of codon occurrences throughout a transcript, might 
improve the classification performance of our algorithm. However, we find that 
autocorrelation patterns are not domain-specific, and surprisingly, are 
unrelated to tRNA reusage, in contrast to previous reports. Instead, our results 
suggest that codon autocorrelation patterns are a by-product of codon optimality 
throughout a sequence, where highly expressed genes display autocorrelated 
"optimal" codons, whereas lowly expressed genes display autocorrelated 
"nonoptimal" codons.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz124
PMCID: PMC6759073
PMID: 31220870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1543. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1964-1974. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz125.

Many Options, Few Solutions: Over 60 My Snakes Converged on a Few Optimal Venom 
Formulations.

Barua A(1), Mikheyev AS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology Graduate University, Onna, Japan.
(2)Evolutionary Genomics Research Group, Ecology and Evolution Unit, Australian 
National University, Canberra, Australia.

Gene expression changes contribute to complex trait variations in both 
individuals and populations. However, the evolution of gene expression 
underlying complex traits over macroevolutionary timescales remains poorly 
understood. Snake venoms are proteinaceous cocktails where the expression of 
each toxin can be quantified and mapped to a distinct genomic locus and traced 
for millions of years. Using a phylogenetic generalized linear mixed model, we 
analyzed expression data of toxin genes from 52 snake species spanning the 3 
venomous snake families and estimated phylogenetic covariance, which acts as a 
measure of evolutionary constraint. We find that evolution of toxin combinations 
is not constrained. However, although all combinations are in principle 
possible, the actual dimensionality of phylomorphic space is low, with 
envenomation strategies focused around only four major toxin families: 
metalloproteases, three-finger toxins, serine proteases, and phospholipases A2. 
Although most extant snakes prioritize either a single or a combination of major 
toxin families, they are repeatedly recruited and lost. We find that over 
macroevolutionary timescales, the venom phenotypes were not shaped by 
phylogenetic constraints, which include important microevolutionary constraints 
such as epistasis and pleiotropy, but more likely by ecological filtering that 
permits a small number of optimal solutions. As a result, phenotypic optima were 
repeatedly attained by distantly related species. These results indicate that 
venoms evolve by selection on biochemistry of prey envenomation, which permit 
diversity through parallelism, and impose strong limits, since only a few of the 
theoretically possible strategies seem to work well and are observed in extant 
snakes.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz125
PMCID: PMC6736290
PMID: 31220860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1544. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2631-2655. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz101.

Aquatic Adaptation and Depleted Diversity: A Deep Dive into the Genomes of the 
Sea Otter and Giant Otter.

Beichman AC(1), Koepfli KP(2)(3), Li G(4), Murphy W(5), Dobrynin P(2)(3), Kliver 
S(3), Tinker MT(6), Murray MJ(7), Johnson J(8), Lindblad-Toh K(8)(9), Karlsson 
EK(8)(10), Lohmueller KE(1)(11)(12), Wayne RK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(2)Center for Species Survival, Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute, 
National Zoological Park, Washington, DC.
(3)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Siberian Branch of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
(4)College of Life Science, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China.
(5)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, 
College Station, TX.
(6)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, 
Santa Cruz, CA.
(7)Monterey Bay Aquarium, Monterey, CA.
(8)Vertebrate Genome Biology, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA.
(9)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(10)Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical 
School, Worcester, MA.
(11)Interdepartmental Program in Bioinformatics, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA.

Despite its recent invasion into the marine realm, the sea otter (Enhydra 
lutris) has evolved a suite of adaptations for life in cold coastal waters, 
including limb modifications and dense insulating fur. This uniquely dense coat 
led to the near-extinction of sea otters during the 18th-20th century fur trade 
and an extreme population bottleneck. We used the de novo genome of the southern 
sea otter (E. l. nereis) to reconstruct its evolutionary history, identify genes 
influencing aquatic adaptation, and detect signals of population bottlenecks. We 
compared the genome of the southern sea otter with the tropical 
freshwater-living giant otter (Pteronura brasiliensis) to assess common and 
divergent genomic trends between otter species, and with the closely related 
northern sea otter (E. l. kenyoni) to uncover population-level trends. We found 
signals of positive selection in genes related to aquatic adaptations, 
particularly limb development and polygenic selection on genes related to hair 
follicle development. We found extensive pseudogenization of olfactory receptor 
genes in both the sea otter and giant otter lineages, consistent with patterns 
of sensory gene loss in other aquatic mammals. At the population level, the 
southern sea otter and the northern sea otter showed extremely low genomic 
diversity, signals of recent inbreeding, and demographic histories marked by 
population declines. These declines may predate the fur trade and appear to have 
resulted in an increase in putatively deleterious variants that could impact the 
future recovery of the sea otter.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz101
PMCID: PMC7967881
PMID: 31212313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1545. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2340-2351. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz142.

Identifying Clusters of High Confidence Homologies in Multiple Sequence 
Alignments.

Ali RH(1)(2), Bogusz M(1), Whelan S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology, Evolutionary Biology Centre, Uppsala 
University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of 
Engineering Sciences and Technology, Topi, Pakistan.

Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) is ubiquitous in evolution and bioinformatics. 
MSAs are usually taken to be a known and fixed quantity on which to perform 
downstream analysis despite extensive evidence that MSA accuracy and uncertainty 
affect results. These errors are known to cause a wide range of problems for 
downstream evolutionary inference, ranging from false inference of positive 
selection to long branch attraction artifacts. The most popular approach to 
dealing with this problem is to remove (filter) specific columns in the MSA that 
are thought to be prone to error. Although popular, this approach has had mixed 
success and several studies have even suggested that filtering might be 
detrimental to phylogenetic studies. We present a graph-based clustering method 
to address MSA uncertainty and error in the software Divvier (available at 
https://github.com/simonwhelan/Divvier), which uses a probabilistic model to 
identify clusters of characters that have strong statistical evidence of shared 
homology. These clusters can then be used to either filter characters from the 
MSA (partial filtering) or represent each of the clusters in a new column 
(divvying). We validate Divvier through its performance on real and simulated 
benchmarks, finding Divvier substantially outperforms existing filtering 
software by retaining more true pairwise homologies calls and removing more 
false positive pairwise homologies. We also find that Divvier, in contrast to 
other filtering tools, can alleviate long branch attraction artifacts induced by 
MSA and reduces the variation in tree estimates caused by MSA uncertainty.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz142
PMCID: PMC6933875
PMID: 31209473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1546. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):2029-2039. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz141.

Variation in Recombination Rate Is Shaped by Domestication and Environmental 
Conditions in Barley.

Dreissig S(1), Mascher M(2)(3), Heckmann S(1).

Author information:
(1)Meiosis Research Group, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant 
Research (IPK) OT Gatersleben, Seeland, Germany.
(2)Domestication Genomics Research Group, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics 
and Crop Plant Research (IPK) OT Gatersleben, Seeland, Germany.
(3)German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research (iDiv) 
Halle-Jena-Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.

Meiotic recombination generates genetic diversity upon which selection can act. 
Recombination rates are highly variable between species, populations, 
individuals, sexes, chromosomes, and chromosomal regions. The underlying 
mechanisms are controlled at the genetic and epigenetic level and show 
plasticity toward the environment. Environmental plasticity may be divided into 
short- and long-term responses. We estimated recombination rates in natural 
populations of wild barley and domesticated landraces using a population 
genetics approach. We analyzed recombination landscapes in wild barley and 
domesticated landraces at high resolution. In wild barley, high recombination 
rates are found in more interstitial chromosome regions in contrast to distal 
chromosome regions in domesticated barley. Among subpopulations of wild barley, 
natural variation in effective recombination rate is correlated with 
temperature, isothermality, and solar radiation in a nonlinear manner. A 
positive linear correlation was found between effective recombination rate and 
annual precipitation. We discuss our findings with respect to how the 
environment might shape effective recombination rates in natural populations. 
Higher recombination rates in wild barley populations subjected to specific 
environmental conditions could be a means to maintain fitness in a strictly 
inbreeding species.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz141
PMCID: PMC6736446
PMID: 31209472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1547. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2184-2194. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz143.

Fierce Selection and Interference in B-Cell Repertoire Response to Chronic 
HIV-1.

Nourmohammad A(1)(2), Otwinowski J(1), Łuksza M(3), Mora T(4), Walczak AM(5).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Dynamics and Self-organization, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(3)Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY.
(4)Laboratoire de Physique Statistique, CNRS, Sorbonne University, Paris-Diderot 
University, École Normale Supérieure (PSL), Paris, France.
(5)Laboratoire de Physique Théorique, CNRS, Sorbonne University, École Normale 
Supérieure (PSL), Paris, France.

During chronic infection, HIV-1 engages in a rapid coevolutionary arms race with 
the host's adaptive immune system. While it is clear that HIV exerts strong 
selection on the adaptive immune system, the characteristics of the somatic 
evolution that shape the immune response are still unknown. Traditional 
population genetics methods fail to distinguish chronic immune response from 
healthy repertoire evolution. Here, we infer the evolutionary modes of B-cell 
repertoires and identify complex dynamics with a constant production of better 
B-cell receptor (BCR) mutants that compete, maintaining large clonal diversity 
and potentially slowing down adaptation. A substantial fraction of mutations 
that rise to high frequencies in pathogen-engaging CDRs of BCRs are beneficial, 
in contrast to many such changes in structurally relevant frameworks that are 
deleterious and circulate by hitchhiking. We identify a pattern where BCRs in 
patients who experience larger viral expansions undergo stronger selection with 
a rapid turnover of beneficial mutations due to clonal interference in their 
CDR3 regions. Using population genetics modeling, we show that the extinction of 
these beneficial mutations can be attributed to the rise of competing beneficial 
alleles and clonal interference. The picture is of a dynamic repertoire, where 
better clones may be outcompeted by new mutants before they fix.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz143
PMCID: PMC6759071
PMID: 31209469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1548. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2111-2126. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz139.

Recombination-Aware Phylogenomics Reveals the Structured Genomic Landscape of 
Hybridizing Cat Species.

Li G(1), Figueiró HV(2)(3), Eizirik E(2)(3), Murphy WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 
TX.
(2)PUCRS, Escola de Ciências, Laboratory of Genomics and Molecular Biology, 
Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(3)INCT-EECBio, Brazil.

Current phylogenomic approaches implicitly assume that the predominant 
phylogenetic signal within a genome reflects the true evolutionary history of 
organisms, without assessing the confounding effects of postspeciation gene flow 
that can produce a mosaic of phylogenetic signals that interact with 
recombinational variation. Here, we tested the validity of this assumption with 
a phylogenomic analysis of 27 species of the cat family, assessing local effects 
of recombination rate on species tree inference and divergence time estimation 
across their genomes. We found that the prevailing phylogenetic signal within 
the autosomes is not always representative of the most probable speciation 
history, due to ancient hybridization throughout felid evolution. Instead, 
phylogenetic signal was concentrated within regions of low recombination, and 
notably enriched within large X chromosome recombination cold spots that 
exhibited recurrent patterns of strong genetic differentiation and selective 
sweeps across mammalian orders. By contrast, regions of high recombination were 
enriched for signatures of ancient gene flow, and these sequences inflated 
crown-lineage divergence times by ∼40%. We conclude that existing phylogenomic 
approaches to infer the Tree of Life may be highly misleading without 
considering the genomic architecture of phylogenetic signal relative to 
recombination rate and its interplay with historical hybridization.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz139
PMCID: PMC6759079
PMID: 31198971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1549. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2212-2226. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz137.

Rapid Evolution of Gained Essential Developmental Functions of a Young Gene via 
Interactions with Other Essential Genes.

Lee YCG(1)(2), Ventura IM(1)(3), Rice GR(4)(5), Chen DY(6), Colmenares SU(2), 
Long M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolution, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(2)Division of Biological Systems and Engineering, Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, 
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA.
(3)CAPES Foundation, Ministry of Education of Brazil, Brasília, DF, Brazil.
(4)Department of Evolution and Ecology, University of California, Davis, Davis, 
CA.
(5)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA.

New genes are of recent origin and only present in a subset of species in a 
phylogeny. Accumulated evidence suggests that new genes, like old genes that are 
conserved across species, can also take on important functions and be essential 
for the survival and reproductive success of organisms. Although there are 
detailed analyses of the mechanisms underlying new genes' gaining fertility 
functions, how new genes rapidly become essential for viability remains unclear. 
We focused on a young retro-duplicated gene (CG7804, which we named Cocoon) in 
Drosophila that originated between 4 and 10 Ma. We found that, unlike its 
evolutionarily conserved parental gene, Cocoon has evolved under positive 
selection and accumulated many amino acid differences at functional sites from 
the parental gene. Despite its young age, Cocoon is essential for the survival 
of Drosophila melanogaster at multiple developmental stages, including the 
critical embryonic stage, and its expression is essential in different tissues 
from those of its parental gene. Functional genomic analyses found that Cocoon 
acquired unique DNA-binding sites and has a contrasting effect on gene 
expression to that of its parental gene. Importantly, Cocoon binding 
predominantly locates at genes that have other essential functions and/or have 
multiple gene-gene interactions, suggesting that Cocoon acquired novel essential 
function to survival through forming interactions that have large impacts on the 
gene interaction network. Our study is an important step toward deciphering the 
evolutionary trajectory by which new genes functionally diverge from parental 
genes and become essential.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz137
PMCID: PMC6759199
PMID: 31187122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1550. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2205-2211. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz135.

DNA Methylation Changes in the Sperm of Captive-Reared Fish: A Route to 
Epigenetic Introgression in Wild Populations.

Rodriguez Barreto D(1), Garcia de Leaniz C(1), Verspoor E(2), Sobolewska H(3), 
Coulson M(2), Consuegra S(1).

Author information:
(1)Biosciences Department, College of Science, Swansea University, Swansea, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Rivers and Lochs Institute, University of the Highlands and Islands, 
Inverness College, Inverness, United Kingdom.
(3)Noahgene Ltd, The e-Centre, Cooperage Way Business Village, Alloa, United 
Kingdom.

Interbreeding between hatchery-reared and wild fish, through deliberate stocking 
or escapes from fish farms, can result in rapid phenotypic and gene expression 
changes in hybrids, but the underlying mechanisms are unknown. We assessed if 
one generation of captive breeding was sufficient to generate inter- and/or 
transgenerational epigenetic modifications in Atlantic salmon. We found that the 
sperm of wild and captive-reared males differed in methylated regions consistent 
with early epigenetic signatures of domestication. Some of the epigenetic marks 
that differed between hatchery and wild males affected genes related to 
transcription, neural development, olfaction, and aggression, and were 
maintained in the offspring beyond developmental reprogramming. Our findings 
suggest that rearing in captivity may trigger epigenetic modifications in the 
sperm of hatchery fish that could explain the rapid phenotypic and genetic 
changes observed among hybrid fish. Epigenetic introgression via fish sperm 
represents a previously unappreciated mechanism that could compromise locally 
adapted fish populations.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz135
PMCID: PMC6759066
PMID: 31180510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1551. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1551-1564. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz123.

Evolution of Gene Expression during a Transition from Environmental to Genetic 
Sex Determination.

Molinier C(1), Reisser CMO(1)(2)(3), Fields PD(4), Ségard A(1), Galimov Y(5), 
Haag CR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CEFE, CNRS, Univ Montpellier, Univ Paul Valéry Montpellier 3, EPHE, IRD, 
Montpellier, France.
(2)Université de Fribourg, Ecology and Evolution, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(3)IFREMER Centre du Pacifique, UMR 241 EIO, Labex CORAIL, Taravao, Tahiti, 
Polynésie Française.
(4)Universität Basel, Zoology Institute, Evolutionary Biology, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(5)Koltsov Institute of Developmental Biology, RAS, Moscow, Russia.

Genetic sex determination (GSD) can evolve from environmental sex determination 
(ESD) via an intermediate state in which both coexist in the same population. 
Such mixed populations are found in the crustacean Daphnia magna, where non-male 
producers (NMP, genetically determined females) coexist with male producers 
(MP), in which male production is environmentally inducible and can also 
artificially be triggered by exposure to juvenile hormone. This makes Daphnia 
magna a rare model species for the study of evolutionary transitions from ESD to 
GSD. Although the chromosomal location of the NMP-determining mutation has been 
mapped, the actual genes and pathways involved in the evolution of GSD from ESD 
remain unknown. Here, we present a transcriptomic analysis of MP and NMP females 
under control (female producing) and under hormone exposure conditions. We found 
∼100 differentially expressed genes between MP and NMP under control conditions. 
Genes in the NMP-determining chromosome region were especially likely to show 
such constitutive expression differences. Hormone exposure led to expression 
changes of an additional ∼100 (MP) to ∼600 (NMP) genes, with an almost 
systematic upregulation of those genes in NMP. These observations suggest that 
the NMP phenotype is not determined by a simple "loss-of-function" mutation. 
Rather, homeostasis of female offspring production under hormone exposure 
appears to be an active state, tightly regulated by complex mechanisms involving 
many genes. In a broader view, this illustrates that the evolution of GSD, while 
potentially initiated by a single mutation, likely leads to secondary 
integration involving many genes and pathways.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz123
PMID: 31173134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1552. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2143-2156. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz138.

Gene Family Evolution in the Pea Aphid Based on Chromosome-Level Genome 
Assembly.

Li Y(1), Park H(1), Smith TE(1), Moran NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX.

Genome structural variations, including duplications, deletions, insertions, and 
inversions, are central in the evolution of eukaryotic genomes. However, 
structural variations present challenges for high-quality genome assembly, 
hampering efforts to understand the evolution of gene families and genome 
architecture. An example is the genome of the pea aphid (Acyrthosiphon pisum) 
for which the current assembly is composed of thousands of short scaffolds, many 
of which are known to be misassembled. Here, we present an improved version of 
the A. pisum genome based on the use of two long-range proximity ligation 
methods. The new assembly contains four long scaffolds (40-170 Mb), 
corresponding to the three autosomes and the X chromosome of A. pisum, and 
encompassing 86% of the new assembly. Assembly accuracy is supported by several 
quality assessments. Using this assembly, we identify the chromosomal locations 
and relative ages of duplication events, and the locations of horizontally 
acquired genes. The improved assembly illuminates the mode of gene family 
evolution by providing proximity information between paralogs. By estimating 
nucleotide polymorphism and coverage depth from resequencing data, we determined 
that many short scaffolds not assembling to chromosomes represent hemizygous 
regions, which are especially frequent on the highly repetitive X chromosome. 
Aligning the X-linked aphicarus region, responsible for male wing dimorphism, to 
the new assembly revealed a 50-kb deletion that cosegregates with the winged 
male phenotype in some clones. These results show that long-range scaffolding 
methods can substantially improve assemblies of repetitive genomes and 
facilitate study of gene family evolution and structural variation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz138
PMCID: PMC6759078
PMID: 31173104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1553. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2358-2374. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz136.

Coalescent Theory of Migration Network Motifs.

Alcala N(1), Goldberg A(1)(2), Ramakrishnan U(3), Rosenberg NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Anthropology, Duke University, Durham, NC.
(3)National Centre for Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research, Bangalore, India.

Natural populations display a variety of spatial arrangements, each potentially 
with a distinctive impact on genetic diversity and genetic differentiation among 
subpopulations. Although the spatial arrangement of populations can lead to 
intricate migration networks, theoretical developments have focused mainly on a 
small subset of such networks, emphasizing the island-migration and 
stepping-stone models. In this study, we investigate all small network motifs: 
the set of all possible migration networks among populations subdivided into at 
most four subpopulations. For each motif, we use coalescent theory to derive 
expectations for three quantities that describe genetic variation: nucleotide 
diversity, FST, and half-time to equilibrium diversity. We describe the impact 
of network properties on these quantities, finding that motifs with a high mean 
node degree have the largest nucleotide diversity and the longest time to 
equilibrium, whereas motifs with low density have the largest FST. In addition, 
we show that the motifs whose pattern of variation is most strongly influenced 
by loss of a connection or a subpopulation are those that can be split easily 
into disconnected components. We illustrate our results using two example data 
sets-sky island birds of genus Sholicola and Indian tigers-identifying 
disturbance scenarios that produce the greatest reduction in genetic diversity; 
for tigers, we also compare the benefits of two assisted gene flow scenarios. 
Our results have consequences for understanding the effect of geography on 
genetic diversity, and they can assist in designing strategies to alter 
population migration networks toward maximizing genetic variation in the context 
of conservation of endangered species.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz136
PMCID: PMC6759081
PMID: 31165149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1554. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Nov 1;36(11):2451-2461. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz112.

Phylogenomics Reveals an Ancient Hybrid Origin of the Persian Walnut.

Zhang BW(1), Xu LL(1), Li N(1), Yan PC(2), Jiang XH(1), Woeste KE(3), Lin K(1), 
Renner SS(4), Zhang DY(1), Bai WN(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Processes and Resource Ecology and 
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity Science and Ecological 
Engineering, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Cloud Computing Key Technology and Application, 
Beijing Computing Center, Beijing, China.
(3)USDA Forest Service Hardwood Tree Improvement and Regeneration Center 
(HTIRC), Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN.
(4)Department of Biology, Systematic Botany and Mycology, University of Munich 
(LMU), Munich, Germany.

Persian walnut (Juglans regia) is cultivated worldwide for its high-quality wood 
and nuts, but its origin has remained mysterious because in phylogenies it 
occupies an unresolved position between American black walnuts and Asian 
butternuts. Equally unclear is the origin of the only American butternut, J. 
cinerea. We resequenced the whole genome of 80 individuals from 19 of the 22 
species of Juglans and assembled the genome of its relatives Pterocarya 
stenoptera and Platycarya strobilacea. Using phylogenetic-network analysis of 
single-copy nuclear genes, genome-wide site pattern probabilities, and 
Approximate Bayesian Computation, we discovered that J. regia (and its landrace 
J. sigillata) arose as a hybrid between the American and the Asian lineages and 
that J. cinerea resulted from massive introgression from an immigrating Asian 
butternut into the genome of an American black walnut. Approximate Bayesian 
Computation modeling placed the hybrid origin in the late Pliocene, ∼3.45 My, 
with both parental lineages since having gone extinct in Europe.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz112
PMID: 31163451


1555. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1847-1848. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz073.

Genetic gene expression changes during environmental adaptations tend to reverse 
plastic changes even after the correction for statistical nonindependence.

Ho WC, Zhang J.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Mar 1;36(3):604-612.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz073
PMCID: PMC6657722
PMID: 31155654


1556. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2165-2170. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz133.

The Epigenetic Signature of Colonizing New Environments in Anolis Lizards.

Hu J(1), Askary AM(1), Thurman TJ(1)(2), Spiller DA(3), Palmer TM(4)(5), Pringle 
RM(6), Barrett RDH(1).

Author information:
(1)Redpath Museum and Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(2)Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Panamá, República de Panamá.
(3)Section of Evolution and Ecology and Center for Population Biology, 
University of California, Davis, CA.
(4)Mpala Research Centre, Nanyuki, Kenya.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(6)Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;37(2):608.

Founder populations often show rapid divergence from source populations after 
colonizing new environments. Epigenetic modifications can mediate phenotypic 
responses to environmental change and may be an important mechanism promoting 
rapid differentiation in founder populations. Whereas many long-term studies 
have explored the extent to which divergence between source and founder 
populations is genetically heritable versus plastic, the role of epigenetic 
processes during colonization remains unclear. To investigate epigenetic 
modifications in founding populations, we experimentally colonized eight small 
Caribbean islands with brown anole lizards (Anolis sagrei) from a common source 
population. We then quantitatively measured genome-wide DNA methylation in liver 
tissue using reduced representation bisulfite sequencing of individuals 
transplanted onto islands with high- versus low-habitat quality. We found that 
lizard sex and habitat quality explained a significant proportion of epigenetic 
variation. Differentially methylated cytosines mapped to genes that encode 
proteins with functions likely to be relevant to habitat change (e.g., signal 
transduction, immune response, circadian rhythm). This study provides 
experimental evidence of a relationship between epigenetic responses and the 
earliest stages of colonization of novel environments in nature and suggests 
that habitat quality influences the nature of these epigenetic modifications.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz133
PMID: 31147693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1557. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):2013-2028. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz134.

The Impact of Protein Architecture on Adaptive Evolution.

Moutinho AF(1), Trancoso FF(1), Dutheil JY(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Biology, Plön, Germany.
(2)Unité Mixte de Recherche 5554 Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution, CNRS, 
IRD, EPHE, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Adaptive mutations play an important role in molecular evolution. However, the 
frequency and nature of these mutations at the intramolecular level are poorly 
understood. To address this, we analyzed the impact of protein architecture on 
the rate of adaptive substitutions, aiming to understand how protein biophysics 
influences fitness and adaptation. Using Drosophila melanogaster and Arabidopsis 
thaliana population genomics data, we fitted models of distribution of fitness 
effects and estimated the rate of adaptive amino-acid substitutions both at the 
protein and amino-acid residue level. We performed a comprehensive analysis 
covering genome, gene, and protein structure, by exploring a multitude of 
factors with a plausible impact on the rate of adaptive evolution, such as 
intron number, protein length, secondary structure, relative solvent 
accessibility, intrinsic protein disorder, chaperone affinity, gene expression, 
protein function, and protein-protein interactions. We found that the relative 
solvent accessibility is a major determinant of adaptive evolution, with most 
adaptive mutations occurring at the surface of proteins. Moreover, we observe 
that the rate of adaptive substitutions differs between protein functional 
classes, with genes encoding for protein biosynthesis and degradation signaling 
exhibiting the fastest rates of protein adaptation. Overall, our results suggest 
that adaptive evolution in proteins is mainly driven by intermolecular 
interactions, with host-pathogen coevolution likely playing a major role.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz134
PMCID: PMC6735723
PMID: 31147689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1558. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2277-2291. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz130.

Extreme Differences in Recombination Rate between the Genomes of a Solitary and 
a Social Bee.

Jones JC(1), Wallberg A(1), Christmas MJ(1), Kapheim KM(2), Webster MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biology, Utah State University, Logan, UT.

Social insect genomes exhibit the highest rates of crossing over observed in 
plants and animals. The evolutionary causes of these extreme rates are unknown. 
Insight can be gained by comparing recombination rate variation across the 
genomes of related social and solitary insects. Here, we compare the genomic 
recombination landscape of the highly social honey bee, Apis mellifera, with the 
solitary alfalfa leafcutter bee, Megachile rotundata, by analyzing patterns of 
linkage disequilibrium in population-scale genome sequencing data. We infer that 
average recombination rates are extremely elevated in A. mellifera compared with 
M. rotundata. However, our results indicate that similar factors control the 
distribution of crossovers in the genomes of both species. Recombination rate is 
significantly reduced in coding regions in both species, with genes inferred to 
be germline methylated having particularly low rates. Genes with worker-biased 
patterns of expression in A. mellifera and their orthologs in M. rotundata have 
higher than average recombination rates in both species, suggesting that 
selection for higher diversity in genes involved in worker caste functions in 
social taxa is not the explanation for these elevated rates. Furthermore, we 
find no evidence that recombination has modulated the efficacy of selection 
among genes during bee evolution, which does not support the hypothesis that 
high recombination rates facilitated positive selection for new functions in 
social insects. Our results indicate that the evolution of sociality in insects 
likely entailed selection on modifiers that increased recombination rates genome 
wide, but that the genomic recombination landscape is determined by the same 
factors.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz130
PMID: 31143942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1559. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1653-1670. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz077.

Inner Ear Genes Underwent Positive Selection and Adaptation in the Mammalian 
Lineage.

Pisciottano F(1)(2), Cinalli AR(1)(2), Stopiello JM(1)(2), Castagna VC(3), 
Elgoyhen AB(1)(2), Rubinstein M(1)(2)(4), Gómez-Casati ME(1)(2)(3), Franchini 
LF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones en Ingeniería Genética y Biología Molecular 
(INGEBI), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(3)Instituto de Farmacología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires,Argentina.
(4)Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (FCEN), Universidad de Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires,Argentina.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Dec 1;36(12):2925-2926.

The mammalian inner ear possesses functional and morphological innovations that 
contribute to its unique hearing capacities. The genetic bases underlying the 
evolution of this mammalian landmark are poorly understood. We propose that the 
emergence of morphological and functional innovations in the mammalian inner ear 
could have been driven by adaptive molecular evolution. In this work, we 
performed a meta-analysis of available inner ear gene expression data sets in 
order to identify genes that show signatures of adaptive evolution in the 
mammalian lineage. We analyzed ∼1,300 inner ear expressed genes and found that 
13% show signatures of positive selection in the mammalian lineage. Several of 
these genes are known to play an important function in the inner ear. In 
addition, we identified that a significant proportion of genes showing 
signatures of adaptive evolution in mammals have not been previously reported to 
participate in inner ear development and/or physiology. We focused our analysis 
in two of these genes: STRIP2 and ABLIM2 by generating null mutant mice and 
analyzed their auditory function. We found that mice lacking Strip2 displayed a 
decrease in neural response amplitudes. In addition, we observed a reduction in 
the number of afferent synapses, suggesting a potential cochlear neuropathy. 
Thus, this study shows the usefulness of pursuing a high-throughput evolutionary 
approach followed by functional studies to track down genes that are important 
for inner ear function. Moreover, this approach sheds light on the genetic bases 
underlying the evolution of the mammalian inner ear.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz077
PMID: 31137036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1560. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):2001-2012. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz132.

The Birth and Death of Toxins with Distinct Functions: A Case Study in the Sea 
Anemone Nematostella.

Sachkova MY(1)(2), Singer SA(1), Macrander J(3)(4), Reitzel AM(3), Peigneur 
S(5), Tytgat J(5), Moran Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, Alexander Silberman Institute 
of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.
(3)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, 
NC.
(4)Florida Southern College, Lakeland, FL.
(5)Department of Toxicology and Pharmacology, Catholic University of Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.

The cnidarian Nematostella vectensis has become an established lab model, 
providing unique opportunities for venom evolution research. The Nematostella 
venom system is multimodal: involving both nematocytes and ectodermal gland 
cells, which produce a toxin mixture whose composition changes throughout the 
life cycle. Additionally, their modes of interaction with predators and prey 
vary between eggs, larvae, and adults, which is likely shaped by the dynamics of 
the venom system. Nv1 is a major component of adult venom, with activity against 
arthropods (through specific inhibition of sodium channel inactivation) and 
fish. Nv1 is encoded by a cluster of at least 12 nearly identical genes that 
were proposed to be undergoing concerted evolution. Surprisingly, we found that 
Nematostella venom includes several Nv1 paralogs escaping a pattern of general 
concerted evolution, despite belonging to the Nv1-like family. Here, we show two 
of these new toxins, Nv4 and Nv5, are lethal for zebrafish larvae but harmless 
to arthropods, unlike Nv1. Furthermore, unlike Nv1, the newly identified toxins 
are expressed in early life stages. Using transgenesis and immunostaining, we 
demonstrate that Nv4 and Nv5 are localized to ectodermal gland cells in larvae. 
The evolution of Nv4 and Nv5 can be described either as neofunctionalization or 
as subfunctionalization. Additionally, the Nv1-like family includes several 
pseudogenes being an example of nonfunctionalization and venom evolution through 
birth-and-death mechanism. Our findings reveal the evolutionary history for a 
toxin radiation and point toward the ecological function of the novel toxins 
constituting a complex cnidarian venom.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz132
PMID: 31134275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1561. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1990-2000. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz129.

Operon Concatenation Is an Ancient Feature That Restricts the Potential to 
Rearrange Bacterial Chromosomes.

Brandis G(1), Cao S(1), Hughes D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, 
Biomedical Center, Uppsala, Sweden.

The last common ancestor of the Gammaproteobacteria carried an important 40-kb 
chromosome section encoding 51 proteins of the transcriptional and translational 
machinery. These genes were organized into eight contiguous operons 
(rrnB-tufB-secE-rpoBC-str-S10-spc-alpha). Over 2 Gy of evolution, in different 
lineages, some of the operons became separated by multigene insertions. 
Surprisingly, in many Enterobacteriaceae, much of the ancient organization is 
conserved, indicating a strong selective force on the operons to remain 
colinear. Here, we show for one operon pair, tufB-secE in Salmonella, that an 
interruption of contiguity significantly reduces growth rate. Our data show that 
the tufB-secE operons are concatenated by an interoperon terminator-promoter 
overlap that plays a significant role regulating gene expression. Interrupting 
operon contiguity interferes with this regulation, reducing cellular fitness. 
Six operons of the ancestral chromosome section remain contiguous in Salmonella 
(tufB-secE-rpoBC and S10-spc-alpha) and, strikingly, each of these operon pairs 
is also connected by an interoperon terminator-promoter overlap. Accordingly, we 
propose that operon concatenation is an ancient feature that restricts the 
potential to rearrange bacterial chromosomes and can select for the maintenance 
of a colinear operon organization over billions of years.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz129
PMCID: PMC6735719
PMID: 31132113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1562. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):2069-2085. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz131.

A Fast Likelihood Method to Reconstruct and Visualize Ancestral Scenarios.

Ishikawa SA(1)(2)(3), Zhukova A(1), Iwasaki W(2), Gascuel O(1).

Author information:
(1)Unité Bioinformatique Evolutive, Institut Pasteur, C3BI USR 3756 IP & CNRS, 
Paris, France.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Evolutionary Genomics of RNA Viruses, Virology Department, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.

The reconstruction of ancestral scenarios is widely used to study the evolution 
of characters along phylogenetic trees. One commonly uses the marginal posterior 
probabilities of the character states, or the joint reconstruction of the most 
likely scenario. However, marginal reconstructions provide users with state 
probabilities, which are difficult to interpret and visualize, whereas joint 
reconstructions select a unique state for every tree node and thus do not 
reflect the uncertainty of inferences. We propose a simple and fast approach, 
which is in between these two extremes. We use decision-theory concepts (namely, 
the Brier score) to associate each node in the tree to a set of likely states. A 
unique state is predicted in tree regions with low uncertainty, whereas several 
states are predicted in uncertain regions, typically around the tree root. To 
visualize the results, we cluster the neighboring nodes associated with the same 
states and use graph visualization tools. The method is implemented in the 
PastML program and web server. The results on simulated data demonstrate the 
accuracy and robustness of the approach. PastML was applied to the 
phylogeography of Dengue serotype 2 (DENV2), and the evolution of drug 
resistances in a large HIV data set. These analyses took a few minutes and 
provided convincing results. PastML retrieved the main transmission routes of 
human DENV2 and showed the uncertainty of the human-sylvatic DENV2 geographic 
origin. With HIV, the results show that resistance mutations mostly emerge 
independently under treatment pressure, but resistance clusters are found, 
corresponding to transmissions among untreated patients.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz131
PMCID: PMC6735705
PMID: 31127303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1563. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1846. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz095.

Digging Ancient Signals Out of Modern Human Genomes.

Caspermeyer J(1).

Author information:
(1)MBE Press Office.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1628-1642.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz095
PMID: 31124570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1564. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Oct 1;36(10):2352-2357. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz128.

Joint Maximum Likelihood of Phylogeny and Ancestral States Is Not Consistent.

Shaw DA(1), Dinh VC(2), Matsen FA(1).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA.
(2)Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE.

Maximum likelihood estimation in phylogenetics requires a means of handling 
unknown ancestral states. Classical maximum likelihood averages over these 
unknown intermediate states, leading to provably consistent estimation of the 
topology and continuous model parameters. Recently, a computationally efficient 
approach has been proposed to jointly maximize over these unknown states and 
phylogenetic parameters. Although this method of joint maximum likelihood 
estimation can obtain estimates more quickly, its properties as an estimator are 
not yet clear. In this article, we show that this method of jointly estimating 
phylogenetic parameters along with ancestral states is not consistent in 
general. We find a sizeable region of parameter space that generates data on a 
four-taxon tree for which this joint method estimates the internal branch length 
to be exactly zero, even in the limit of infinite-length sequences. More 
generally, we show that this joint method only estimates branch lengths 
correctly on a set of measure zero. We show empirically that branch length 
estimates are systematically biased downward, even for short branches.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz128
PMCID: PMC6759070
PMID: 31119293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1565. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):2086-2103. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz122.

Modeling Structural Constraints on Protein Evolution via Side-Chain 
Conformational States.

Perron U(1), Kozlov AM(2), Stamatakis A(2)(3), Goldman N(1), Moal IH(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, 
Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.
(2)Computational Molecular Evolution Group, Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical 
Studies, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Institute for Theoretical Informatics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 
Karlsruhe, Germany.
(4)Computational and Modelling Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline Research and 
Development, Stevenage, United Kingdom.

Few models of sequence evolution incorporate parameters describing protein 
structure, despite its high conservation, essential functional role and 
increasing availability. We present a structurally aware empirical substitution 
model for amino acid sequence evolution in which proteins are expressed using an 
expanded alphabet that relays both amino acid identity and structural 
information. Each character specifies an amino acid as well as information about 
the rotamer configuration of its side-chain: the discrete geometric pattern of 
permitted side-chain atomic positions, as defined by the dihedral angles between 
covalently linked atoms. By assigning rotamer states in 251,194 protein 
structures and identifying 4,508,390 substitutions between closely related 
sequences, we generate a 55-state "Dayhoff-like" model that shows that the 
evolutionary properties of amino acids depend strongly upon side-chain geometry. 
The model performs as well as or better than traditional 20-state models for 
divergence time estimation, tree inference, and ancestral state reconstruction. 
We conclude that not only is rotamer configuration a valuable source of 
information for phylogenetic studies, but that modeling the concomitant 
evolution of sequence and structure may have important implications for 
understanding protein folding and function.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz122
PMCID: PMC6736381
PMID: 31114882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1566. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1643-1652. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz072.

River Valleys Shaped the Maternal Genetic Landscape of Han Chinese.

Li YC(1)(2)(3), Ye WJ(4), Jiang CG(4), Zeng Z(4), Tian JY(1)(2)(3), Yang 
LQ(1)(2)(3), Liu KJ(4), Kong QP(1)(2)(3)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution/Key Laboratory of 
Healthy Aging Research of Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(2)CAS Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(3)Kunming Key Laboratory of Healthy Aging Study, Kunming, China.
(4)Chengdu 23 Mofang Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Chengdu, China.
(5)KIZ-SU Joint Laboratory of Animal Model and Drug Development, College of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(6)KIZ/CUHK Joint Laboratory of Bioresources and Molecular Research in Common 
Diseases, Kunming, China.

A general south-north genetic divergence has been observed among Han Chinese in 
previous studies. However, these studies, especially those on mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA), are based either on partial mtDNA sequences or on limited samples. 
Given that Han Chinese comprise the world's largest population and reside around 
the whole China, whether the north-south divergence can be observed after all 
regional populations are considered remains unknown. Moreover, factors involved 
in shaping the genetic landscape of Han Chinese need further investigation. In 
this study, we dissected the matrilineal landscape of Han Chinese by studying 
4,004 mtDNA haplogroup-defining variants in 21,668 Han samples from virtually 
all provinces in China. Our results confirmed the genetic divergence between 
southern and northern Han populations. However, we found a significant genetic 
divergence among populations from the three main river systems, that is, the 
Yangtze, the Yellow, and the Zhujiang (Pearl) rivers, which largely attributed 
to the prevalent distribution of haplogroups D4, B4, and M7 in these river 
valleys. Further analyses based on 4,986 mitogenomes, including 218 newly 
generated sequences, indicated that this divergence was already established 
during the early Holocene and may have resulted from population expansion 
facilitated by ancient agricultures along these rivers. These results imply that 
the maternal gene pools of the contemporary Han populations have retained the 
genetic imprint of early Neolithic farmers from different river basins, or that 
river valleys represented relative migration barriers that facilitated genetic 
differentiation, thus highlighting the importance of the three ancient 
agricultures in shaping the genetic landscape of the Han Chinese.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz072
PMID: 31112995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1567. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1357. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz069.

Cartilaginous Fishes Provide Insights into the Origin, Diversification, and 
Sexually Dimorphic Expression of Vertebrate Estrogen Receptor Genes.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2018 Nov 1;35(11):2695-2701.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz069
PMID: 31107964


1568. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1843. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz120.

Comment on "microRNAs in the Same Clusters Evolve to Coordinately Regulate 
Functionally Related Genes".

Marco A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, United 
Kingdom.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1844-1845.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Sep;33(9):2232-47.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz120
PMCID: PMC6657724
PMID: 31099393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1569. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1844-1845. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz121.

Response to Comment on "microRNAs in the Same Clusters Evolve to Coordinately 
Regulate Functionally Related Genes".

Wang Y(1), Zhang H(1), Lu J(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, Center for 
Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Sep;33(9):2232-47.
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1843.

Metazoan miRNAs are significantly enriched in clusters. In a previous study 
(Wang, et al. 2016), we proposed a "functional co-adaptation" model to explain 
how clustering helps new miRNAs survive and develop functions during long-term 
evolution. Recently, Marco re-analyzed our data and came to a different 
conclusion. The major concern Marco raised is whether the observed number of 
genes targeted by at least two conserved miRNAs with different seeds from the 
same miRNA clusters is statistically higher than the number obtained under the 
assumption of randomness. Marco claimed that our approach of shuffling 
miRNA-target interactions would lead to spuriously low P values. Marco also 
argued our observation that clustered miRNAs have more common targets than 
expected is mostly contributed by seeds with similar sequences. However, we 
found his analyses were conducted in an inappropriate approach and do not refute 
our model. We also provide new evidences to reaffirm our model.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz121
PMID: 31099389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1570. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1955-1963. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz119.

Protein Melting Temperature Cannot Fully Assess Whether Protein Folding Free 
Energy Underlies the Universal Abundance-Evolutionary Rate Correlation Seen in 
Proteins.

Razban RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA.

The protein misfolding avoidance hypothesis explains the universal negative 
correlation between protein abundance and sequence evolutionary rate across the 
proteome by identifying protein folding free energy (ΔG) as the confounding 
variable. Abundant proteins resist toxic misfolding events by being more stable, 
and more stable proteins evolve slower because their mutations are more 
destabilizing. Direct supporting evidence consists only of computer simulations. 
A study taking advantage of a recent experimental breakthrough in measuring 
protein stability proteome-wide through melting temperature (Tm) (Leuenberger et 
al. 2017), found weak misfolding avoidance hypothesis support for the 
Escherichia coli proteome, and no support for the Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Homo 
sapiens, and Thermus thermophilus proteomes (Plata and Vitkup 2018). I find that 
the nontrivial relationship between Tm and ΔG and inaccuracy in Tm measurements 
by Leuenberger et al. 2017 can be responsible for not observing strong positive 
abundance-Tm and strong negative Tm-evolutionary rate correlations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz119
PMCID: PMC6736436
PMID: 31093676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1571. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1902-1920. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz114.

The Legacy of Sexual Ancestors in Phenotypic Variability, Gene Expression, and 
Homoeolog Regulation of Asexual Hybrids and Polyploids.

Bartoš O(1)(2), Röslein J(1)(3), Kotusz J(4), Paces J(1)(5), Pekárik L(6)(7), 
Petrtýl M(1)(8), Halačka K(9), Štefková Kašparová E(1), Mendel J(9), Boroń 
A(10), Juchno D(10), Leska A(10), Jablonska O(10), Benes V(11), Šídová M(12), 
Janko K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics, Laboratory of Fish Genetics, The 
Czech Academy of Sciences, Libechov, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(3)Department of Biology and Ecology, Faculty of Science, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(4)Museum of Natural History, University of Wroclaw, Wroclaw, Poland.
(5)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Laboratory of Genomics and Bioinformatics, 
The Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.
(6)Plant Science and Biodiversity Center, Institute of Botany, Slovak Academy of 
Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(7)Faculty of Education, Trnava University, Trnava, Slovakia.
(8)Department of Zoology and Fisheries, Faculty of Agrobiology, Food and Natural 
Resources, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(9)Institute of Vertebrate Biology, Czech Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(10)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, University of 
Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, Olsztyn, Poland.
(11)Genomics Core Facility, European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(12)Institute of Biotechnology of the Czech Academy of Sciences - BIOCEV, 
Vestec, Czech Republic.

Hybridization and polyploidization are important evolutionary processes whose 
impacts range from the alteration of gene expression and phenotypic variation to 
the triggering of asexual reproduction. We investigated fishes of the Cobitis 
taenia-elongatoides hybrid complex, which allowed us to disentangle the direct 
effects of both processes, due to the co-occurrence of parental species with 
their diploid and triploid hybrids. Employing morphological, ecological, and 
RNAseq approaches, we investigated the molecular determinants of hybrid and 
polyploid forms. In contrast with other studies, hybridization and polyploidy 
induced relatively very little transgressivity. Instead, Cobitis hybrids 
appeared intermediate with a clear effect of genomic dosing when triploids 
expressed higher similarity to the parent contributing two genome sets. This 
dosage effect was symmetric in the germline (oocyte gene expression), 
interestingly though, we observed an overall bias toward C. taenia in somatic 
tissues and traits. At the level of individual genes, expression-level dominance 
vastly prevailed over additivity or transgressivity. Also, trans-regulation of 
gene expression was less efficient in diploid hybrids than in triploids, where 
the expression modulation of homoeologs derived from the "haploid" parent was 
stronger than those derived from the "diploid" parent. Our findings suggest that 
the apparent intermediacy of hybrid phenotypes results from the combination of 
individual genes with dominant expression rather than from simple additivity. 
The efficiency of cross-talk between trans-regulatory elements further appears 
dosage dependent. Important effects of polyploidization may thus stem from 
changes in relative concentrations of trans-regulatory elements and their 
binding sites between hybridizing genomes. Links between gene regulation and 
asexuality are discussed.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz114
PMCID: PMC6735777
PMID: 31077330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1572. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1931-1941. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz116.

Human Migration and the Spread of the Nematode Parasite Wuchereria bancrofti.

Small ST(1)(2), Labbé F(1), Coulibaly YI(3), Nutman TB(4), King CL(5), Serre 
D(6), Zimmerman PA(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN.
(3)Head Filariasis Unit, NIAID-Mali ICER, University of Bamako, Bamako, Mali.
(4)NIAID National Institutes of Health, North Bethesda, MD.
(5)Global Health and Disease, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.
(6)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD.
(7)Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH.

The human disease lymphatic filariasis causes the debilitating effects of 
elephantiasis and hydrocele. Lymphatic filariasis currently affects the lives of 
90 million people in 52 countries. There are three nematodes that cause 
lymphatic filariasis, Brugia malayi, Brugia timori, and Wuchereria bancrofti, 
but 90% of all cases of lymphatic filariasis are caused solely by W. bancrofti 
(Wb). Here we use population genomics to reconstruct the probable route and 
timing of migration of Wb strains that currently infect Africa, Haiti, and Papua 
New Guinea (PNG). We used selective whole genome amplification to sequence 42 
whole genomes of single Wb worms from populations in Haiti, Mali, Kenya, and 
PNG. Our results are consistent with a hypothesis of an Island Southeast Asia or 
East Asian origin of Wb. Our demographic models support divergence times that 
correlate with the migration of human populations. We hypothesize that PNG was 
infected at two separate times, first by the Melanesians and later by the 
migrating Austronesians. The migrating Austronesians also likely introduced Wb 
to Madagascar where later migrations spread it to continental Africa. From 
Africa, Wb spread to the New World during the transatlantic slave trade. Genome 
scans identified 17 genes that were highly differentiated among Wb populations. 
Among these are genes associated with human immune suppression, insecticide 
sensitivity, and proposed drug targets. Identifying the distribution of genetic 
diversity in Wb populations and selection forces acting on the genome will build 
a foundation to test future hypotheses and help predict response to current 
eradication efforts.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz116
PMCID: PMC6735882
PMID: 31077328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1573. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1942-1954. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz118.

Intraspecific Variation in Microsatellite Mutation Profiles in Daphnia magna.

Ho EKH(1), Macrae F(1), Latta LC(1)(2), Benner MJ(1), Sun C(3), Ebert D(4), 
Schaack S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Reed College, Portland, OR.
(2)Division of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Lewis-Clark State College, 
Lewiston, ID.
(3)Institute of Apicultural Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Environmental Sciences, Zoology, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.

Microsatellite loci (tandem repeats of short nucleotide motifs) are highly 
abundant in eukaryotic genomes and often used as genetic markers because they 
can exhibit variation both within and between populations. Although widely 
recognized for their mutability and utility, the mutation rates of 
microsatellites have only been empirically estimated in a few species, and have 
rarely been compared across genotypes and populations within a species. Here, we 
investigate the dynamics of microsatellite mutation over long- and short-time 
periods by quantifying the starting abundance and mutation rates for 
microsatellites for six different genotypes of Daphnia magna, an aquatic 
microcrustacean, collected from three populations (Finland, Germany, and 
Israel). Using whole-genome sequences of these six starting genotypes, 
descendent mutation accumulation (MA) lines, and large population controls 
(non-MA lines), we find each genotype exhibits a distinctive initial 
microsatellite profile which clusters according to the population-of-origin. 
During the period of MA, we observe motif-specific, highly variable, and rapid 
microsatellite mutation rates across genotypes of D. magna, the average of which 
is order of magnitude greater than the recently reported rate observed in a 
single genotype of the congener, Daphnia pulex. In our experiment, genotypes 
with more microsatellites starting out exhibit greater losses and those with 
fewer microsatellites starting out exhibit greater gains-a context-dependent 
mutation bias that has not been reported previously. We discuss how 
genotype-specific mutation rates and spectra, in conjunction with evolutionary 
forces, can shape both the differential accumulation of repeat content in the 
genome and the evolution of mutation rates.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz118
PMCID: PMC6934441
PMID: 31077327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1574. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1862-1873. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz108.

Molecular Evolution in Large Steps-Codon Substitutions under Positive Selection.

Chen Q(1), He Z(1), Lan A(1), Shen X(1), Wen H(1), Wu CI(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)CAS Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Molecular evolution is believed to proceed in small steps. The step size can be 
defined by a distance reflecting physico-chemical disparities between amino acid 
(AA) pairs that can be exchanged by single 1-bp mutations. We show that AA 
substitution rates are strongly and negatively correlated with this distance but 
only when positive selection is relatively weak. We use the McDonald and 
Kreitman test to separate the influences of positive and negative selection. 
While negative selection is indeed stronger on AA substitutions generating 
larger changes in chemical properties of AAs, positive selection operates by 
different rules. For 65 of the 75 possible pairs, positive selection is 
comparable in strength regardless of AA distance. However, the ten pairs under 
the strongest positive selection all exhibit large leaps in chemical properties. 
Five of the ten pairs are shared between Drosophila and Hominoids, thus hinting 
at a common but modest biochemical basis of adaptation across taxa. The 
hypothesis that adaptive changes often take large functional steps will need to 
be extensively tested. If validated, molecular models will need to better 
integrate positive and negative selection in the search for adaptive signal.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz108
PMID: 31077325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1575. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1612-1623. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz113.

Fitness Landscape of the Fission Yeast Genome.

Grech L(1), Jeffares DC(1)(2), Sadée CY(1), Rodríguez-López M(1), Bitton DA(1), 
Hoti M(1), Biagosch C(1), Aravani D(1), Speekenbrink M(3), Illingworth CJR(4), 
Schiffer PH(1), Pidoux AL(5), Tong P(5), Tallada VA(6), Allshire R(5), Levin 
HL(7), Bähler J(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Biology and York Biomedical Research Institute, University of 
York, United Kingdom.
(3)Experimental Psychology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(5)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
United Kingdom.
(6)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de 
Olavide/Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Seville, Spain.
(7)Division of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)UCL Genetics Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

The relationship between DNA sequence, biochemical function, and molecular 
evolution is relatively well-described for protein-coding regions of genomes, 
but far less clear in noncoding regions, particularly, in eukaryote genomes. In 
part, this is because we lack a complete description of the essential noncoding 
elements in a eukaryote genome. To contribute to this challenge, we used 
saturating transposon mutagenesis to interrogate the Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
genome. We generated 31 million transposon insertions, a theoretical coverage of 
2.4 insertions per genomic site. We applied a five-state hidden Markov model 
(HMM) to distinguish insertion-depleted regions from insertion biases. Both raw 
insertion-density and HMM-defined fitness estimates showed significant 
quantitative relationships to gene knockout fitness, genetic diversity, 
divergence, and expected functional regions based on transcription and gene 
annotations. Through several analyses, we conclude that transposon insertions 
produced fitness effects in 66-90% of the genome, including substantial portions 
of the noncoding regions. Based on the HMM, we estimate that 10% of the 
insertion depleted sites in the genome showed no signal of conservation between 
species and were weakly transcribed, demonstrating limitations of comparative 
genomics and transcriptomics to detect functional units. In this species, 3'- 
and 5'-untranslated regions were the most prominent insertion-depleted regions 
that were not represented in measures of constraint from comparative genomics. 
We conclude that the combination of transposon mutagenesis, evolutionary, and 
biochemical data can provide new insights into the relationship between genome 
function and molecular evolution.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz113
PMCID: PMC6657727
PMID: 31077324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1576. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1817-1830. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz107.

Robust Method for Detecting Convergent Shifts in Evolutionary Rates.

Partha R(1)(2), Kowalczyk A(1)(2), Clark NL(1)(2), Chikina M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA.
(2)Joint Carnegie Mellon University-University of Pittsburgh PhD Program in 
Computational Biology, Pittsburgh, PA.

Identifying genomic elements underlying phenotypic adaptations is an important 
problem in evolutionary biology. Comparative analyses learning from convergent 
evolution of traits are gaining momentum in accurately detecting such elements. 
We previously developed a method for predicting phenotypic associations of 
genetic elements by contrasting patterns of sequence evolution in species 
showing a phenotype with those that do not. Using this method, we successfully 
demonstrated convergent evolutionary rate shifts in genetic elements associated 
with two phenotypic adaptations, namely the independent subterranean and marine 
transitions of terrestrial mammalian lineages. Our original method calculates 
gene-specific rates of evolution on branches of phylogenetic trees using linear 
regression. These rates represent the extent of sequence divergence on a branch 
after removing the expected divergence on the branch due to background factors. 
The rates calculated using this regression analysis exhibit an important 
statistical limitation, namely heteroscedasticity. We observe that the rates on 
branches that are longer on average show higher variance, and describe how this 
problem adversely affects the confidence with which we can make inferences about 
rate shifts. Using a combination of data transformation and weighted regression, 
we have developed an updated method that corrects this heteroscedasticity in the 
rates. We additionally illustrate the improved performance offered by the 
updated method at robust detection of convergent rate shifts in phylogenetic 
trees of protein-coding genes across mammals, as well as using simulated tree 
data sets. Overall, we present an important extension to our 
evolutionary-rates-based method that performs more robustly and consistently at 
detecting convergent shifts in evolutionary rates.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz107
PMCID: PMC6657723
PMID: 31077321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1577. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1624-1627. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz117.

Sequencing Disparity in the Genomic Era.

David KT(1), Wilson AE(2), Halanych KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Molette Biology Laboratory for Environmental and Climate Change Studies, 
Department of Biological Sciences, Auburn University, Auburn, AL.
(2)School of Fisheries, Aquaculture, and Aquatic Sciences, Auburn University, 
Auburn, AL.

Advances in sequencing technology have resulted in the expectation that genomic 
studies will become more representative of organismal diversity. To test this 
expectation, we explored species representation of nonhuman eukaryotes in the 
Sequence Read Archive. Though species richness has been increasing steadily, 
species evenness is decreasing over time. Moreover, the top 1% most studied 
organisms increasingly represent a larger proportion of total experiments, 
demonstrating growing bias in favor of a small minority of species. To better 
understand molecular processes and patterns, genomic studies should reverse 
current trends by adopting more comparative approaches.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz117
PMID: 31077317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1578. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1746-1763. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz099.

Return to the Sea, Get Huge, Beat Cancer: An Analysis of Cetacean Genomes 
Including an Assembly for the Humpback Whale (Megaptera novaeangliae).

Tollis M(1)(2)(3), Robbins J(4), Webb AE(5), Kuderna LFK(6), Caulin AF(7), 
Garcia JD(2), Bèrubè M(4)(8), Pourmand N(9), Marques-Bonet T(6)(10)(11)(12), 
O'Connell MJ(13), Palsbøll PJ(4)(8), Maley CC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(3)School of Informatics, Computing, and Cyber Systems, Northern Arizona 
University, Flagstaff, AZ.
(4)Center for Coastal Studies, Provincetown, MA.
(5)Center for Computational Genetics and Genomics, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(6)Instituto de Biologia Evolutiva (UPF-CSIC), PRBB, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Genomics and Computational Biology Program, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA.
(8)Groningen Institute of Evolutionary Life Sciences, University of Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(9)Jack Baskin School of Engineering, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa 
Cruz, CA.
(10)CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain.
(12)Institut Català de Paleontologia Miquel Crusafont, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Edifici ICTA-ICP, Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Computational and Molecular Evolutionary Biology Research Group, School of 
Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Cetaceans are a clade of highly specialized aquatic mammals that include the 
largest animals that have ever lived. The largest whales can have ∼1,000× more 
cells than a human, with long lifespans, leaving them theoretically susceptible 
to cancer. However, large-bodied and long-lived animals do not suffer higher 
risks of cancer mortality than humans-an observation known as Peto's Paradox. To 
investigate the genomic bases of gigantism and other cetacean adaptations, we 
generated a de novo genome assembly for the humpback whale (Megaptera 
novaeangliae) and incorporated the genomes of ten cetacean species in a 
comparative analysis. We found further evidence that rorquals (family 
Balaenopteridae) radiated during the Miocene or earlier, and inferred that 
perturbations in abundance and/or the interocean connectivity of North Atlantic 
humpback whale populations likely occurred throughout the Pleistocene. Our 
comparative genomic results suggest that the evolution of cetacean gigantism was 
accompanied by strong selection on pathways that are directly linked to cancer. 
Large segmental duplications in whale genomes contained genes controlling the 
apoptotic pathway, and genes inferred to be under accelerated evolution and 
positive selection in cetaceans were enriched for biological processes such as 
cell cycle checkpoint, cell signaling, and proliferation. We also inferred 
positive selection on genes controlling the mammalian appendicular and cranial 
skeletal elements in the cetacean lineage, which are relevant to extensive 
anatomical changes during cetacean evolution. Genomic analyses shed light on the 
molecular mechanisms underlying cetacean traits, including gigantism, and will 
contribute to the development of future targets for human cancer therapies.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz099
PMCID: PMC6657726
PMID: 31070747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1579. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1831-1842. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz103.

PhyloToL: A Taxon/Gene-Rich Phylogenomic Pipeline to Explore Genome Evolution of 
Diverse Eukaryotes.

Cerón-Romero MA(1)(2), Maurer-Alcalá XX(1)(2)(3), Grattepanche JD(1)(4), Yan 
Y(1), Fonseca MM(5), Katz LA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Smith College, Northampton, MA.
(2)Program in Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Amherst, Amherst, MA.
(3)Institute of Cell Biology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Biology Department, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.
(5)CIIMAR - Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, 
University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Estimating multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) and inferring phylogenies are 
essential for many aspects of comparative biology. Yet, many bioinformatics 
tools for such analyses have focused on specific clades, with greatest attention 
paid to plants, animals, and fungi. The rapid increase in high-throughput 
sequencing (HTS) data from diverse lineages now provides opportunities to 
estimate evolutionary relationships and gene family evolution across the 
eukaryotic tree of life. At the same time, these types of data are known to be 
error-prone (e.g., substitutions, contamination). To address these opportunities 
and challenges, we have refined a phylogenomic pipeline, now named PhyloToL, to 
allow easy incorporation of data from HTS studies, to automate production of 
both MSAs and gene trees, and to identify and remove contaminants. PhyloToL is 
designed for phylogenomic analyses of diverse lineages across the tree of life 
(i.e., at scales of >100 My). We demonstrate the power of PhyloToL by assessing 
stop codon usage in Ciliophora, identifying contamination in a taxon- and 
gene-rich database and exploring the evolutionary history of chromosomes in the 
kinetoplastid parasite Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African 
sleeping sickness. Benchmarking PhyloToL's homology assessment against that of 
OrthoMCL and a published paper on superfamilies of bacterial and eukaryotic 
organellar outer membrane pore-forming proteins demonstrates the power of our 
approach for determining gene family membership and inferring gene trees. 
PhyloToL is highly flexible and allows users to easily explore HTS data, test 
hypotheses about phylogeny and gene family evolution and combine outputs with 
third-party tools (e.g., PhyloChromoMap, iGTP).

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz103
PMCID: PMC6657734
PMID: 31062861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1580. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1804-1816. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz106.

Estimating Epidemic Incidence and Prevalence from Genomic Data.

Vaughan TG(1)(2)(3), Leventhal GE(4)(5), Rasmussen DA(2)(6)(7), Drummond 
AJ(1)(8), Welch D(1)(8), Stadler T(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Computational Evolution, University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(2)Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zürich, Basel, 
Switzerland.
(3)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(4)Institute of Integrative Biology, ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA.
(6)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, NC.
(7)Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC.
(8)School of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Modern phylodynamic methods interpret an inferred phylogenetic tree as a partial 
transmission chain providing information about the dynamic process of 
transmission and removal (where removal may be due to recovery, death, or 
behavior change). Birth-death and coalescent processes have been introduced to 
model the stochastic dynamics of epidemic spread under common epidemiological 
models such as the SIS and SIR models and are successfully used to infer 
phylogenetic trees together with transmission (birth) and removal (death) rates. 
These methods either integrate analytically over past incidence and prevalence 
to infer rate parameters, and thus cannot explicitly infer past incidence or 
prevalence, or allow such inference only in the coalescent limit of large 
population size. Here, we introduce a particle filtering framework to explicitly 
infer prevalence and incidence trajectories along with phylogenies and 
epidemiological model parameters from genomic sequences and case count data in a 
manner consistent with the underlying birth-death model. After demonstrating the 
accuracy of this method on simulated data, we use it to assess the prevalence 
through time of the early 2014 Ebola outbreak in Sierra Leone.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz106
PMCID: PMC6681632
PMID: 31058982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1581. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1884-1901. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz111.

Unprecedented Parallel Photosynthetic Losses in a Heterotrophic Orchid Genus.

Barrett CF(1), Sinn BT(1), Kennedy AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV.
(2)Mycology and Nematology Genetic Diversity and Biology Laboratory, USDA-APHIS, 
Beltsville, MD.

Heterotrophic plants are evolutionary experiments in genomic, morphological, and 
physiological change. Yet, genomic sampling gaps exist among independently 
derived heterotrophic lineages, leaving unanswered questions about the process 
of genome modification. Here, we have sequenced complete plastid genomes for all 
species of the leafless orchid genus Hexalectris, including multiple individuals 
for most, and leafy relatives Basiphyllaea and Bletia. Our objectives are to 
determine the number of independent losses of photosynthesis and to test 
hypotheses on the process of genome degradation as a result of relaxed 
selection. We demonstrate four to five independent losses of photosynthesis in 
Hexalectris based on degradation of the photosynthetic apparatus, with all but 
two species displaying evidence of losses, and variation in gene loss extending 
below the species level. Degradation in the atp complex is advanced in 
Hexalectris warnockii, whereas only minimal degradation (i.e., physical loss) 
has occurred among some "housekeeping" genes. We find genomic rearrangements, 
shifts in Inverted Repeat boundaries including complete loss in one accession of 
H. arizonica, and correlations among substitutional and genomic attributes. Our 
unprecedented finding of multiple, independent transitions to a fully 
mycoheterotrophic lifestyle in a single genus reveals that the number of such 
transitions among land plants is likely underestimated. This study underscores 
the importance of dense taxon sampling, which is highly informative for 
advancing models of genome evolution in heterotrophs. Mycoheterotrophs such as 
Hexalectris provide forward-genetic opportunities to study the consequences of 
radical genome evolution beyond what is possible with mutational studies in 
model organisms alone.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz111
PMCID: PMC6736286
PMID: 31058965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1582. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1601-1611. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz109.

Limited Evolutionary Conservation of the Phenotypic Effects of Antibiotic 
Resistance Mutations.

Apjok G(1), Boross G(1)(2), Nyerges Á(1), Fekete G(1), Lázár V(1)(3), Papp B(1), 
Pál C(1), Csörgő B(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Synthetic and Systems Biology Unit, Institute of Biochemistry, Biological 
Research Centre of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hungary.
(2)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(3)Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Faculty of Biology, Haifa, Israel.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA.

Erratum in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2021 Jun 25;38(7):3029.

Multidrug-resistant clinical isolates are common in certain pathogens, but rare 
in others. This pattern may be due to the fact that mutations shaping resistance 
have species-specific effects. To investigate this issue, we transferred a range 
of resistance-conferring mutations and a full resistance gene into Escherichia 
coli and closely related bacteria. We found that resistance mutations in one 
bacterial species frequently provide no resistance, in fact even yielding drug 
hypersensitivity in close relatives. In depth analysis of a key gene involved in 
aminoglycoside resistance (trkH) indicated that preexisting mutations in other 
genes-intergenic epistasis-underlie such extreme differences in mutational 
effects between species. Finally, reconstruction of adaptive landscapes under 
multiple antibiotic stresses revealed that mutations frequently provide 
multidrug resistance or elevated drug susceptibility (i.e., collateral 
sensitivity) only with certain combinations of other resistance mutations. We 
conclude that resistance and collateral sensitivity are contingent upon the 
genetic makeup of the bacterial population, and such contingency could shape the 
long-term fate of resistant bacteria. These results underlie the importance of 
species-specific treatment strategies.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz109
PMCID: PMC6657729
PMID: 31058961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1583. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):1874-1883. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz110.

Limits to Compensatory Mutations: Insights from Temperature-Sensitive Alleles.

Tomala K(1), Zrebiec P(1), Hartl DL(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Jagiellonian 
University, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA.

Previous experiments with temperature-sensitive mutants of the yeast enzyme 
orotidine 5'-phosphate decarboxylase (encoded in gene URA3) yielded the 
unexpected result that reversion occurs only through exact reversal of the 
original mutation (Jakubowska A, Korona R. 2009. Lack of evolutionary 
conservation at positions important for thermal stability in the yeast ODCase 
protein. Mol Biol Evol. 26(7):1431-1434.). We recreated a set of these mutations 
in which the codon had two nucleotide substitutions, making exact reversion much 
less likely. We screened these double mutants for reversion and obtained a 
number of compensatory mutations occurring at alternative sites in the molecule. 
None of these compensatory mutations fully restored protein performance. The 
mechanism of partial compensation is consistent with a model in which protein 
stabilization is additive, as the same secondary mutations can compensate 
different primary alternations. The distance between primary and compensatory 
residues precludes direct interaction between the sites. Instead, most of the 
compensatory mutants were clustered in proximity to the catalytic center. All of 
the second-site compensatory substitutions occurred at relatively conserved 
sites, and the amino acid replacements were to residues found at these sites in 
a multispecies alignment of the protein. Based on the estimated distribution of 
changes in Gibbs free energy among a large number of amino acid replacements, we 
estimate that, for most proteins, the probability that a second-site mutation 
would have a sufficiently large stabilizing effect to offset a 
temperature-sensitive mutation in the order of 10-4 or less. Hence compensation 
is likely to take place only for slightly destabilizing mutations because highly 
stabilizing mutations are exceeding rare.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz110
PMCID: PMC6735812
PMID: 31058959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1584. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1418-1429. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz061.

Serotonin Receptor 1A Variation Is Associated with Anxiety and Agonistic 
Behavior in Chimpanzees.

Staes N(1)(2)(3), Sherwood CC(1), Freeman H(4), Brosnan SF(4)(5)(6), Schapiro 
SJ(4), Hopkins WD(6)(7), Bradley BJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, Center for the Advanced Study of Human 
Paleobiology, The George Washington University, Washington, DC.
(2)Department of Biology, Behavioral Ecology and Ecophysiology Group, University 
of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Centre for Research and Conservation, Royal Zoological Society of Antwerp, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(4)Michale E. Keeling Center for Comparative Medicine and Research, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer CenterBastrop, TX.
(5)Department of Psychology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA.
(6)Neuroscience Institute and Language Research Center, Georgia State 
University, Atlanta, GA.
(7)Ape Cognition and Conservation Initiative, Des Moines, IA.

Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that plays an important role in regulating 
behavior and personality in humans and other mammals. Polymorphisms in genes 
coding for the serotonin receptor subtype 1A (HTR1A), the serotonin transporter 
(SLC6A4), and the serotonin degrading enzyme monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) are 
associated with anxiety, impulsivity, and neurotic personality in humans. In 
primates, previous research has largely focused on SLC6A4 and MAOA, with few 
studies investigating the role of HTR1A polymorphic variation on behavior. Here, 
we examined variation in the coding region of HTR1A across apes, and genotyped 
polymorphic coding variation in a sample of 214 chimpanzees with matched 
measures of personality and behavior. We found evidence for positive selection 
at three amino acid substitution sites, one in chimpanzees-bonobos (Thr26Ser), 
one in humans (Phe33Val), and one in orangutans (Ala274Gly). Investigation of 
the HTR1A coding region in chimpanzees revealed a polymorphic site, where a C/A 
single nucleotide polymorphism changes a proline to a glutamine in the amino 
acid sequence (Pro248Gln). The substitution is located in the third 
intracellular loop of the receptor, a region important for serotonin signal 
transduction. The derived variant is the major allele in this population 
(frequency 0.67), and is associated with a reduction in anxiety, decreased rates 
of male agonistic behavior, and an increase in socio-positive behavior. These 
results are the first evidence that the HTR1A gene may be involved in regulating 
social behavior in chimpanzees and encourage further systematic investigation of 
polymorphic variation in other primate populations with corresponding data on 
behavior.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz061
PMCID: PMC7968385
PMID: 31045220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1585. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1359-1372. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz062.

Eggplant Domestication: Pervasive Gene Flow, Feralization, and Transcriptomic 
Divergence.

Page A(1), Gibson J(1), Meyer RS(2), Chapman MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California, Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.

In the context of food security, examining the genomics of domestication will 
help identify genes underlying adaptive and economically important phenotypes, 
for example, larger fruit, improved taste, and loss of agronomically inferior 
phenotypes.  Examination of genome-scale single nucleotide polymorphisms 
demonstrates the relationships between wild ancestors of eggplant (Solanum 
melongena L.), confirming that Solanum insanum L. is the wild progenitor. This 
species is split roughly into an Eastern (Malaysian, Thai, and Vietnamese) and 
Western (Indian, Madagascan, and Sri Lankan) group, with domesticates derived 
from the former. Additional "wild" accessions from India appear to be feral 
escapes, derived multiple times from domesticated varieties through admixture. 
Accessions with small egg-shaped fruit are generally found intermixed with East 
Asian Solanum insanum confirming they are primitive relative to the 
large-fruited domesticates.  Comparative transcriptomics was used to track the 
loci under selection. Sequence analysis revealed a genetic bottleneck reducing 
variation by almost 50% in the primitive accessions relative to the wild species 
and a further 10% in the landraces. We also show evidence for selection on genes 
with a role in response to wounding and apoptosis.  Genes showing a significant 
difference in expression between wild and primitive or between primitive and 
landrace genepools were mostly (>75%) downregulated in the derived populations 
and enriched for gene ontologies related to defense, flowering, signaling, and 
response to biotic and abiotic stimuli.  This work reveals genomic changes 
involved in crop domestication and improvement, and the population genetics work 
explains why defining the eggplant domestication trajectory has been so 
challenging.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz062
PMID: 31039581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1586. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1600. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz070.

The Cone Opsin Repertoire of Osteoglossomorph Fishes: Gene Loss inMormyrid 
Electric Fish and a Long Wavelength-Sensitive Cone Opsin That Survived 3R.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Mar 1;36(3):447-457.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz070
PMID: 31039253


1587. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1783-1792. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz105.

Altered Localization of Hybrid Incompatibility Proteins in Drosophila.

Cooper JC(1), Lukacs A(2), Reich S(1), Schauer T(2), Imhof A(2)(3), Phadnis 
N(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Molecular Biology, Biomedical Center 
(BMC), LMU Munich, Germany.
(3)Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM), 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Müchen, Munich, Germany.

Understanding the molecular basis of hybrid incompatibilities is a fundamental 
pursuit in evolutionary genetics. In crosses between Drosophila melanogaster 
females and Drosophila simulans males, an interaction between at least three 
genes is necessary for hybrid male lethality: Hmr mel, Lhr sim, and gfzf sim. 
Although HMR and LHR physically bind each other and function together in a 
single complex, the connection between gfzf and either of these proteins remains 
mysterious. Here, we show that GFZF localizes to many regions of the genome in 
both D. melanogaster and D. simulans, including at telomeric retrotransposon 
repeats. We find that GFZF localization at telomeres is significantly different 
between these two species, reflecting the rapid evolution of telomeric 
retrotransposon copy number composition between the two species. Next, we show 
that GFZF and HMR normally do not colocalize in D. melanogaster. In interspecies 
hybrids, however, HMR shows extensive mis-localization to GFZF sites, thus 
uncovering a new molecular interaction between these hybrid incompatibility 
factors. We find that spreading of HMR to GFZF sites requires gfzf sim but not 
Lhr sim, suggesting distinct roles for these factors in the hybrid 
incompatibility. Finally, we find that overexpression of HMR and LHR within 
species is sufficient to mis-localize HMR to GFZF binding sites, indicating that 
HMR has a natural low affinity for GFZF sites. Together, these studies provide 
the first insights into the different properties of gfzf between D. melanogaster 
and D. simulans, and uncover a molecular interaction between gfzf and Hmr in the 
form of altered protein localization.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz105
PMCID: PMC6657725
PMID: 31038678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1588. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):2053-2068. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz102.

Shared Signature Dynamics Tempered by Local Fluctuations Enables Fold 
Adaptability and Specificity.

Zhang S(1), Li H(1), Krieger JM(1), Bahar I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational and Systems Biology, School of Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

Recent studies have drawn attention to the evolution of protein dynamics, in 
addition to sequence and structure, based on the premise 
structure-encodes-dynamics-encodes-function. Of interest is to understand how 
functional differentiation is accomplished while maintaining the fold, or how 
intrinsic dynamics plays out in the evolution of structural variations and 
functional specificity. We performed a systematic computational analysis of 
26,899 proteins belonging to 116 CATH superfamilies. Characterizing cooperative 
mechanisms and convergent/divergent features that underlie the 
shared/differentiated dynamics of family members required a methodology that 
lends itself to efficient analyses of large ensembles of proteins. We therefore 
introduced, SignDy, an integrated pipeline for evaluating the signature dynamics 
of families based on elastic network models. Our analysis confirmed that family 
members share conserved, highly cooperative (global) modes of motion. 
Importantly, our analysis discloses a subset of motions that sharply 
distinguishes subfamilies, which lie in a low-to-intermediate frequency regime 
of the mode spectrum. This regime has maximal impact on functional 
differentiation of families into subfamilies, while being evolutionarily 
conserved among subfamily members. Notably, the high-frequency end of the 
spectrum also reveals evolutionary conserved features across and within 
subfamilies; but in sharp contrast to global motions, high-frequency modes are 
minimally collective. Modulation of robust/conserved global dynamics by 
low-to-intermediate frequency fluctuations thus emerges as a versatile mechanism 
ensuring the adaptability of selected folds and the specificity of their 
subfamilies. SignDy further allows for dynamics-based categorization as a new 
layer of information relevant to distinctive mechanisms of action of 
subfamilies, beyond sequence or structural classifications.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz102
PMCID: PMC6736388
PMID: 31028708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1589. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1768-1782. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz104.

Aneuploidy Enables Cross-Adaptation to Unrelated Drugs.

Yang F(1), Teoh F(2), Tan ASM(2), Cao Y(3)(4), Pavelka N(2), Berman J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology, School of Molecular 
Cell Biology and Biotechnology, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel 
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and 
Research (A*STAR), Singapore.
(3)Department of Vascular Disease, Shanghai TCM-Integrated Hospital, Shanghai 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Shanghai TCM-Integrated Institute of Vascular Disease, Shanghai, China.

Aneuploidy is common both in tumor cells responding to chemotherapeutic agents 
and in fungal cells adapting to antifungal drugs. Because aneuploidy 
simultaneously affects many genes, it has the potential to confer multiple 
phenotypes to the same cells. Here, we analyzed the mechanisms by which Candida 
albicans, the most prevalent human fungal pathogen, acquires the ability to 
survive both chemotherapeutic agents and antifungal drugs. Strikingly, 
adaptation to both types of drugs was accompanied by the acquisition of specific 
whole-chromosome aneuploidies, with some aneuploid karyotypes recovered 
independently and repeatedly from very different drug conditions. Specifically, 
strains selected for survival in hydroxyurea, an anticancer drug, acquired 
cross-adaptation to caspofungin, a first-line antifungal drug, and both acquired 
traits were attributable to trisomy of the same chromosome: loss of trisomy was 
accompanied by loss of adaptation to both drugs. Mechanistically, aneuploidy 
simultaneously altered the copy number of most genes on chromosome 2, yet 
survival in hydroxyurea or caspofungin required different genes and stress 
response pathways. Similarly, chromosome 5 monosomy conferred increased 
tolerance to both fluconazole and to caspofungin, antifungals with different 
mechanisms of action. Thus, the potential for cross-adaptation is not a feature 
of aneuploidy per se; rather, it is dependent on specific genes harbored on 
given aneuploid chromosomes. Furthermore, pre-exposure to hydroxyurea increased 
the frequency of appearance of caspofungin survivors, and hydroxyurea-adapted C. 
albicans cells were refractory to antifungal drug treatment in a mouse model of 
systemic candidiasis. This highlights the potential clinical consequences for 
the management of cancer chemotherapy patients at risk of fungal infections.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz104
PMCID: PMC6657732
PMID: 31028698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1590. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1734-1745. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz098.

Transposable Elements Are Important Contributors to Standing Variation in Gene 
Expression in Capsella Grandiflora.

Uzunović J(1), Josephs EB(2), Stinchcombe JR(1)(3), Wright SI(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Plant Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI.
(3)Koffler Scientific Reserve, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Centre for the Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Transposable elements (TEs) make up a significant portion of eukaryotic genomes 
and are important drivers of genome evolution. However, the extent to which TEs 
affect gene expression variation on a genome-wide scale in comparison with other 
types of variants is still unclear. We characterized TE insertion polymorphisms 
and their association with gene expression in 124 whole-genome sequences from a 
single population of Capsella grandiflora, and contrasted this with the effects 
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Population frequency of insertions 
was negatively correlated with distance to genes, as well as density of 
conserved noncoding elements, suggesting that the negative effects of TEs on 
gene regulation are important in limiting their abundance. Rare TE variants 
strongly influence gene expression variation, predominantly through 
downregulation. In contrast, rare SNPs contribute equally to up- and 
down-regulation, but have a weaker individual effect than TEs. An expression 
quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis shows that a greater proportion of 
common TEs are eQTLs as opposed to common SNPs, and a third of the genes with TE 
eQTLs do not have SNP eQTLs. In contrast with rare TE insertions, common 
insertions are more likely to increase expression, consistent with recent models 
of cis-regulatory evolution favoring enhancer alleles. Taken together, these 
results imply that TEs are a significant contributor to gene expression 
variation and are individually more likely than rare SNPs to cause extreme 
changes in gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz098
PMID: 31028401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1591. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1671-1685. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz090.

Additive Traits Lead to Feeding Advantage and Reproductive Isolation, Promoting 
Homoploid Hybrid Speciation.

Masello JF(1), Quillfeldt P(1), Sandoval-Castellanos E(2), Alderman R(3), 
Calderón L(1), Cherel Y(4), Cole TL(1)(5), Cuthbert RJ(6), Marin M(7)(8), 
Massaro M(9), Navarro J(10), Phillips RA(11), Ryan PG(12), Shepherd LD(13), 
Suazo CG(1), Weimerskirch H(4), Moodley Y(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Ecology & Systematics, Justus Liebig University Giessen, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Animal Breeding and Husbandry, University of Kiel, Germany.
(3)Department of Primary Industries, Parks, Water and Environment, Hobart, TAS, 
Australia.
(4)Centre d'Etudes Biologiques de Chizé, UMR 7372 CNRS-Université de La 
Rochelle, Villiers-en-Bois, France.
(5)Manaaki Whenua Landcare Research, Canterbury, New Zealand.
(6)Royal Society for the Protection of Birds (RSPB), The Lodge, Sandy, 
Bedfordshire, United Kingdom.
(7)Section of Ornithology, Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, Los 
Angeles, CA.
(8)Feather Link Inc., Cincinnati, OH.
(9)Institute for Land, Water and Society, School of Environmental Sciences, 
Charles Sturt University, Albury, NSW, Australia.
(10)Institut de Ciències del Mar CSIC, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)British Antarctic Survey, Natural Environment Research Council, High Cross, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(12)FitzPatrick Institute of African Ornithology, DST-NRF Centre of Excellence, 
University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, Republic of South Africa.
(13)Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa, Wellington, New Zealand.
(14)Department of Zoology, University of Venda, Private Bag X5050, Thohoyandou 
0950, Republic of South Africa.

Speciation through homoploid hybridization (HHS) is considered extremely rare in 
animals. This is mainly because the establishment of reproductive isolation as a 
product of hybridization is uncommon. Additionally, many traits are underpinned 
by polygeny and/or incomplete dominance, where the hybrid phenotype is an 
additive blend of parental characteristics. Phenotypically intermediate hybrids 
are usually at a fitness disadvantage compared with parental species and tend to 
vanish through backcrossing with parental population(s). It is therefore unknown 
whether the additive nature of hybrid traits in itself could lead successfully 
to HHS. Using a multi-marker genetic data set and a meta-analysis of diet and 
morphology, we investigated a potential case of HHS in the prions (Pachyptila 
spp.), seabirds distinguished by their bills, prey choice, and timing of 
breeding. Using approximate Bayesian computation, we show that the medium-billed 
Salvin's prion (Pachyptila salvini) could be a hybrid between the narrow-billed 
Antarctic prion (Pachyptila desolata) and broad-billed prion (Pachyptila 
vittata). Remarkably, P. salvini's intermediate bill width has given it a 
feeding advantage with respect to the other Pachyptila species, allowing it to 
consume a broader range of prey, potentially increasing its fitness. Available 
metadata showed that P. salvini is also intermediate in breeding phenology and, 
with no overlap in breeding times, it is effectively reproductively isolated 
from either parental species through allochrony. These results provide evidence 
for a case of HHS in nature, and show for the first time that additivity of 
divergent parental traits alone can lead directly to increased hybrid fitness 
and reproductive isolation.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz090
PMCID: PMC6657733
PMID: 31028398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1592. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1764-1767. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz100.

Social Parasitism in the Honeybee (Apis mellifera) Is Not Controlled by a Single 
SNP.

Christmas MJ(1), Smith NMA(2), Oldroyd BP(2), Webster MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Behaviour and Genetics of Social Insects Lab, Ecology and Evolution, 
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The Cape bee (Apis mellifera capensis) is a subspecies of the honeybee, in which 
workers commonly lay diploid unfertilized eggs via a process known as thelytoky. 
A recent study aimed to map the genetic basis of this trait in the progeny of a 
single capensis queen where workers laid either diploid (thelytokous) or haploid 
(arrhenotokous) eggs. A nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in a 
gene of unknown function was reported to be strongly associated with thelytoky 
in this colony. Here, we analyze genome sequences from a global sample of A. 
mellifera and identify populations where the proposed thelytoky allele at this 
SNP is common but thelytoky is absent. We also analyze genome sequences of three 
capensis queens produced by thelytoky and find that, contrary to predictions, 
they do not carry the proposed thelytoky allele. The proposed SNP is therefore 
neither sufficient nor required to produce thelytoky in A. mellifera.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz100
PMID: 31028394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1593. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1793-1803. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz094.

Bayesian Inference of Evolutionary Histories under Time-Dependent Substitution 
Rates.

Membrebe JV(1), Suchard MA(2)(3)(4), Rambaut A(5)(6), Baele G(1), Lemey P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Transplantation, Rega Institute, 
KU Leuven - University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Biomathematics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Fielding School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA.
(5)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(6)Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Many factors complicate the estimation of time scales for phylogenetic 
histories, requiring increasingly complex evolutionary models and inference 
procedures. The widespread application of molecular clock dating has led to the 
insight that evolutionary rate estimates may vary with the time frame of 
measurement. This is particularly well established for rapidly evolving viruses 
that can accumulate sequence divergence over years or even months. However, this 
rapid evolution stands at odds with a relatively high degree of conservation of 
viruses or endogenous virus elements over much longer time scales. Building on 
recent insights into time-dependent evolutionary rates, we develop a formal and 
flexible Bayesian statistical inference approach that accommodates rate 
variation through time. We evaluate the novel molecular clock model on a foamy 
virus cospeciation history and a lentivirus evolutionary history and compare the 
performance to other molecular clock models. For both virus examples, we 
estimate a similarly strong time-dependent effect that implies rates varying 
over four orders of magnitude. The application of an analogous codon 
substitution model does not implicate long-term purifying selection as the cause 
of this effect. However, selection does appear to affect divergence time 
estimates for the less deep evolutionary history of the Ebolavirus genus. 
Finally, we explore the application of our approach on woolly mammoth ancient 
DNA data, which shows a much weaker, but still important, time-dependent rate 
effect that has a noticeable impact on node age estimates. Future developments 
aimed at incorporating more complex evolutionary processes will further add to 
the broad applicability of our approach.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz094
PMCID: PMC6657730
PMID: 31004175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1594. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1728-1733. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz096.

Active Site-Induced Evolutionary Constraints Follow Fold Polarity Principles in 
Soluble Globular Enzymes.

Mayorov A(1), Dal Peraro M(2), Abriata LA(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(2)Laboratory for Biomolecular Modeling, École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Protein Production and Structure Core Facility, École Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

A recent analysis of evolutionary rates in >500 globular soluble enzymes 
revealed pervasive conservation gradients toward catalytic residues. By looking 
at amino acid preference profiles rather than evolutionary rates in the same 
data set, we quantified the effects of active sites on site-specific constraints 
for physicochemical traits. We found that conservation gradients respond to 
constraints for polarity, hydrophobicity, flexibility, rigidity and structure in 
ways consistent with fold polarity principles; while sites far from active sites 
seem to experience no physicochemical constraint, rather being highly variable 
and favoring amino acids of low metabolic cost. Globally, our results highlight 
that amino acid variation contains finer information about protein structure 
than usually regarded in evolutionary models, and that this information is 
retrievable automatically with simple fits. We propose that analyses of the kind 
presented here incorporated into models of protein evolution should allow for 
better description of the physical chemistry that underlies molecular evolution.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz096
PMID: 31004173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1595. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1686-1700. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz091.

PRDM9 Diversity at Fine Geographical Scale Reveals Contrasting Evolutionary 
Patterns and Functional Constraints in Natural Populations of House Mice.

Vara C(1)(2), Capilla L(1), Ferretti L(3), Ledda A(4), Sánchez-Guillén RA(1)(5), 
Gabriel SI(6), Albert-Lizandra G(1)(2), Florit-Sabater B(1)(2), Bello-Rodríguez 
J(1)(2), Ventura J(7), Searle JB(8), Mathias ML(6), Ruiz-Herrera A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Genome Integrity and Instability Group, Institut de Biotecnologia i 
Biomedicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Departament de Biologia Cel.lular, Fisiologia i Immunologia, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Oxford Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and 
Discovery, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department for Infectious Disease Epidemiology, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(5)Instituto de Ecología AC (INECOL), Red de Biología Evolutiva, Xalapa, 
Veracruz, Mexico.
(6)CESAM - Centre for Environmental and Marine Studies, Departamento de Biologia 
Animal, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal.
(7)Departament de Biologia Animal, Biologia Vegetal i Ecologia, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY.

One of the major challenges in evolutionary biology is the identification of the 
genetic basis of postzygotic reproductive isolation. Given its pivotal role in 
this process, here we explore the drivers that may account for the evolutionary 
dynamics of the PRDM9 gene between continental and island systems of chromosomal 
variation in house mice. Using a data set of nearly 400 wild-caught mice of 
Robertsonian systems, we identify the extent of PRDM9 diversity in natural house 
mouse populations, determine the phylogeography of PRDM9 at a local and global 
scale based on a new measure of pairwise genetic divergence, and analyze 
selective constraints. We find 57 newly described PRDM9 variants, this diversity 
being especially high on Madeira Island, a result that is contrary to the 
expectations of reduced variation for island populations. Our analysis suggest 
that the PRDM9 allelic variability observed in Madeira mice might be influenced 
by the presence of distinct chromosomal fusions resulting from a complex pattern 
of introgression or multiple colonization events onto the island. Importantly, 
we detect a significant reduction in the proportion of PRDM9 heterozygotes in 
Robertsonian mice, which showed a high degree of similarity in the amino acids 
responsible for protein-DNA binding. Our results suggest that despite the rapid 
evolution of PRDM9 and the variability detected in natural populations, 
functional constraints could facilitate the accumulation of allelic combinations 
that maintain recombination hotspot symmetry. We anticipate that our study will 
provide the basis for examining the role of different PRDM9 genetic backgrounds 
in reproductive isolation in natural populations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz091
PMCID: PMC6657731
PMID: 31004162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1596. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1711-1727. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz093.

Ligand-Binding-Site Structure Shapes Allosteric Signal Transduction and the 
Evolution of Allostery in Protein Complexes.

Abrusán G(1), Marsh JA(1).

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The structure of ligand-binding sites has been shown to profoundly influence the 
evolution of function in homomeric protein complexes. Complexes with multichain 
binding sites (MBSs) have more conserved quaternary structure, more similar 
binding sites and ligands between homologs, and evolve new functions slower than 
homomers with single-chain binding sites (SBSs). Here, using in silico analyses 
of protein dynamics, we investigate whether ligand-binding-site structure shapes 
allosteric signal transduction pathways, and whether the structural similarity 
of binding sites influences the evolution of allostery. Our analyses show that: 
1) allostery is more frequent among MBS complexes than in SBS complexes, 
particularly in homomers; 2) in MBS homomers, semirigid communities and critical 
residues frequently connect interfaces and thus they are characterized by signal 
transduction pathways that cross protein-protein interfaces, whereas SBS 
homomers usually not; 3) ligand binding alters community structure differently 
in MBS and SBS homomers; and 4) except MBS homomers, allosteric proteins are 
more likely to have homologs with similar binding site than nonallosteric 
proteins, suggesting that binding site similarity is an important factor driving 
the evolution of allostery.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz093
PMCID: PMC6657754
PMID: 31004156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1597. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1701-1710. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz092.

Applicability of the Mutation-Selection Balance Model to Population Genetics of 
Heterozygous Protein-Truncating Variants in Humans.

Weghorn D(1)(2)(3), Balick DJ(1)(2), Cassa C(1)(2), Kosmicki JA(4)(5), Daly 
MJ(4)(5), Beier DR(6)(7), Sunyaev SR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(3)Centre for Genomic Regulation and Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(5)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA.
(6)Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Seattle 
Children's Research Institute, Seattle, WA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA.

The fate of alleles in the human population is believed to be highly affected by 
the stochastic force of genetic drift. Estimation of the strength of natural 
selection in humans generally necessitates a careful modeling of drift including 
complex effects of the population history and structure. Protein-truncating 
variants (PTVs) are expected to evolve under strong purifying selection and to 
have a relatively high per-gene mutation rate. Thus, it is appealing to model 
the population genetics of PTVs under a simple deterministic mutation-selection 
balance, as has been proposed earlier (Cassa et al. 2017). Here, we investigated 
the limits of this approximation using both computer simulations and data-driven 
approaches. Our simulations rely on a model of demographic history estimated 
from 33,370 individual exomes of the Non-Finnish European subset of the ExAC 
data set (Lek et al. 2016). Additionally, we compared the African and European 
subset of the ExAC study and analyzed de novo PTVs. We show that the 
mutation-selection balance model is applicable to the majority of human genes, 
but not to genes under the weakest selection.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz092
PMCID: PMC6738481
PMID: 31004148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1598. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1384-1404. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz088.

Inference of Ancient Whole-Genome Duplications and the Evolution of Gene 
Duplication and Loss Rates.

Zwaenepoel A(1)(2)(3), Van de Peer Y(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Center for Plant Systems Biology, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Bioinformatics Institute Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Genetics and Microbiology, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.

Gene tree-species tree reconciliation methods have been employed for studying 
ancient whole-genome duplication (WGD) events across the eukaryotic tree of 
life. Most approaches have relied on using maximum likelihood trees and the 
maximum parsimony reconciliation thereof to count duplication events on specific 
branches of interest in a reference species tree. Such approaches do not account 
for uncertainty in the gene tree and reconciliation, or do so only 
heuristically. The effects of these simplifications on the inference of ancient 
WGDs are unclear. In particular, the effects of variation in gene duplication 
and loss rates across the species tree have not been considered. Here, we 
developed a full probabilistic approach for phylogenomic reconciliation-based 
WGD inference, accounting for both gene tree and reconciliation uncertainty 
using a method based on the principle of amalgamated likelihood estimation. The 
model and methods are implemented in a maximum likelihood and Bayesian setting 
and account for variation of duplication and loss rates across the species tree, 
using methods inspired by phylogenetic divergence time estimation. We applied 
our newly developed framework to ancient WGDs in land plants and investigated 
the effects of duplication and loss rate variation on reconciliation and gene 
count based assessment of these earlier proposed WGDs.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz088
PMID: 31004147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1599. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1201-1214. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz052.

Killer Meiotic Drive and Dynamic Evolution of the wtf Gene Family.

Eickbush MT(1), Young JM(2), Zanders SE(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO.
(2)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
WA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS.

Natural selection works best when the two alleles in a diploid organism are 
transmitted to offspring at equal frequencies. Despite this, selfish loci known 
as meiotic drivers that bias their own transmission into gametes are found 
throughout eukaryotes. Drive is thought to be a powerful evolutionary force, but 
empirical evolutionary analyses of drive systems are limited by low numbers of 
identified meiotic drive genes. Here, we analyze the evolution of the wtf gene 
family of Schizosaccharomyces pombe that contains both killer meiotic drive 
genes and suppressors of drive. We completed assemblies of all wtf genes for two 
S. pombe isolates, as well as a subset of wtf genes from over 50 isolates. We 
find that wtf copy number can vary greatly between isolates and that amino acid 
substitutions, expansions and contractions of DNA sequence repeats, and 
nonallelic gene conversion between family members all contribute to dynamic wtf 
gene evolution. This work demonstrates the power of meiotic drive to foster 
rapid evolution and identifies a recombination mechanism through which 
transposons can indirectly mobilize meiotic drivers.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz052
PMCID: PMC6526906
PMID: 30991417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1600. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1481-1489. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz082.

Genome Evolution of the Obligate Endosymbiont Buchnera aphidicola.

Chong RA(1)(2), Park H(1), Moran NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Hawaii at Mānoa, Honolulu, HI.

An evolutionary consequence of uniparentally transmitted symbiosis is 
degradation of symbiont genomes. We use the system of aphids and their 
maternally inherited obligate endosymbiont, Buchnera aphidicola, to explore the 
evolutionary process of genome degradation. We compared complete genome 
sequences for 39 Buchnera strains, including 23 newly sequenced symbiont genomes 
from diverse aphid hosts. We reconstructed the genome of the most recent shared 
Buchnera ancestor, which contained 616 protein-coding genes, and 39 RNA genes. 
The extent of subsequent gene loss varied across lineages, resulting in modern 
genomes ranging from 412 to 646 kb and containing 354-587 protein-coding genes. 
Loss events were highly nonrandom across loci. Genes involved in replication, 
transcription, translation, and amino acid biosynthesis are largely retained, 
whereas genes underlying ornithine biosynthesis, stress responses, and 
transcriptional regulation were lost repeatedly. Aside from losses, gene order 
is almost completely stable. The main exceptions involve movement between 
plasmid and chromosome locations of genes underlying tryptophan and leucine 
biosynthesis and supporting nutrition of aphid hosts. This set of complete 
genomes enabled tests for signatures of positive diversifying selection. Of 371 
Buchnera genes tested, 29 genes show strong support for ongoing positive 
selection. These include genes encoding outer membrane porins that are expected 
to be involved in direct interactions with hosts. Collectively, these results 
indicate that extensive genome reduction occurred in the ancestral Buchnera 
prior to aphid diversification and that reduction has continued since, with 
losses greater in some lineages and for some loci.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz082
PMID: 30989224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1601. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1521-1532. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz085.

Topology Dictates Evolution of Regulatory Cysteines in a Family of Viral 
Oncoproteins.

Alvarez-Paggi D(1), Lorenzo JR(2), Camporeale G(3), Montero L(3), Sánchez IE(2), 
de Prat Gay G(3), Alonso LG(4).

Author information:
(1)Infant Foundation and CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Universidad de Buenos Aires, Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas 
y Técnicas, Instituto de Química Biológica de la Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y 
Naturales (IQUIBICEN), Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Laboratorio de 
Fisiología de Proteínas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(3)Protein Structure-Function and Engineering Laboratory, Fundación Instituto 
Leloir and IIBBA-CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Instituto de Nanobiotecnología (NANOBIOTEC), CONICET-Universidad de Buenos 
Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Redox regulation in biology is largely operated by cysteine chemistry in 
response to a variety of cell environmental and intracellular stimuli. The high 
chemical reactivity of cysteines determines their conservation in functional 
roles, but their presence can also result in harmful oxidation limiting their 
general use by proteins. Papillomaviruses constitute a unique system for 
studying protein sequence evolution since there are hundreds of anciently 
evolved stable genomes. E7, the viral transforming factor, is a dimeric, 
cysteine-rich oncoprotein that shows both conserved structural and variable 
regulatory cysteines constituting an excellent model for uncovering the 
mechanism that drives the acquisition of redox-sensitive groups. By analyzing 
over 300 E7 sequences, we found that although noncanonical cysteines show no 
obvious sequence conservation pattern, they are nonrandomly distributed based on 
topological constrains. Regulatory residues are strictly excluded from six 
positions stabilizing the hydrophobic core while they are enriched in key 
positions located at the dimerization interface or around the Zn+2 ion. 
Oxidation of regulatory cysteines is linked to dimer dissociation, acting as a 
reversible redox-sensing mechanism that triggers a conformational switch. Based 
on comparative sequence analysis, molecular dynamics simulations and biophysical 
analysis, we propose a model in which the occurrence of cysteine-rich positions 
is dictated by topological constrains, providing an explanation to why a 
degenerate pattern of cysteines can be achieved in a family of homologs. Thus, 
topological principles should enable the possibility to identify hidden 
regulatory cysteines that are not accurately detected using sequence based 
methodology.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz085
PMID: 30982925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1602. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1533-1550. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz086.

High-Order Epistasis in Catalytic Power of Dihydrofolate Reductase Gives Rise to 
a Rugged Fitness Landscape in the Presence of Trimethoprim Selection.

Tamer YT(1), Gaszek IK(1), Abdizadeh H(2)(3), Batur TA(4), Reynolds KA(1)(5), 
Atilgan AR(3), Atilgan C(3), Toprak E(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Green Center for Systems Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX.
(2)Faculty of Science and Engineering, University of Groningen, Groningen, 
Netherlands.
(3)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey.
(5)Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX.

Evolutionary fitness landscapes of several antibiotic target proteins have been 
comprehensively mapped showing strong high-order epistasis between mutations, 
but understanding these effects at the biochemical and structural levels 
remained open. Here, we carried out an extensive experimental and computational 
study to quantitatively understand the evolutionary dynamics of Escherichia coli 
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) enzyme in the presence of trimethoprim-induced 
selection. To facilitate this, we developed a new in vitro assay for rapidly 
characterizing DHFR steady-state kinetics. Biochemical and structural 
characterization of resistance-conferring mutations targeting a total of ten 
residues spanning the substrate binding pocket of DHFR revealed distinct changes 
in the catalytic efficiencies of mutated DHFR enzymes. Next, we measured 
biochemical parameters (Km, Ki, and kcat) for a mutant library carrying all 
possible combinations of six resistance-conferring DHFR mutations and quantified 
epistatic interactions between them. We found that the high-order epistasis in 
catalytic power of DHFR (kcat and Km) creates a rugged fitness landscape under 
trimethoprim selection. Taken together, our data provide a concrete illustration 
of how epistatic coupling at the level of biochemical parameters can give rise 
to complex fitness landscapes, and suggest new strategies for developing mutant 
specific inhibitors.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz086
PMCID: PMC6573477
PMID: 30982891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1603. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1490-1506. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz083.

Contrasting Paternal and Maternal Genetic Histories of Thai and Lao Populations.

Kutanan W(1)(2), Kampuansai J(3)(4), Srikummool M(5), Brunelli A(6), Ghirotto 
S(6), Arias L(2), Macholdt E(2), Hübner A(2), Schröder R(2), Stoneking M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, 
Thailand.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary 
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, 
Thailand.
(4)Center of Excellence in Bioresources for Agriculture, Industry and Medicine, 
Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Science, Naresuan University, 
Phitsanulok, Thailand.
(6)Department of Life Science and Biotechnology, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, 
Italy.

The human demographic history of Mainland Southeast Asia (MSEA) has not been 
well studied; in particular, there have been very few sequence-based studies of 
variation in the male-specific portions of the Y chromosome (MSY). Here, we 
report new MSY sequences of ∼2.3 mB from 914 males and combine these with 
previous data for a total of 928 MSY sequences belonging to 59 populations from 
Thailand and Laos who speak languages belonging to three major Mainland 
Southeast Asia families: Austroasiatic, Tai-Kadai, and Sino-Tibetan. Among the 
92 MSY haplogroups, two main MSY lineages (O1b1a1a* [O-M95*] and O2a* [O-M324*]) 
contribute substantially to the paternal genetic makeup of Thailand and Laos. We 
also analyze complete mitochondrial DNA genome sequences published previously 
from the same groups and find contrasting pattern of male and female genetic 
variation and demographic expansions, especially for the hill tribes, Mon, and 
some major Thai groups. In particular, we detect an effect of postmarital 
residence pattern on genetic diversity in patrilocal versus matrilocal groups. 
Additionally, both male and female demographic expansions were observed during 
the early Mesolithic (∼10 ka), with two later major male-specific expansions 
during the Neolithic period (∼4-5 ka) and the Bronze/Iron Age (∼2.0-2.5 ka). 
These two later expansions are characteristic of the modern Austroasiatic and 
Tai-Kadai groups, respectively, consistent with recent ancient DNA studies. We 
simulate MSY data based on three demographic models (continuous migration, demic 
diffusion, and cultural diffusion) of major Thai groups and find different 
results from mitochondrial DNA simulations, supporting contrasting male and 
female genetic histories.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz083
PMCID: PMC6573475
PMID: 30980085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1604. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1507-1520. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz084.

Signatures of Divergence, Invasiveness, and Terrestrialization Revealed by Four 
Apple Snail Genomes.

Sun J(1), Mu H(2), Ip JCH(2), Li R(2), Xu T(2), Accorsi A(3)(4), Sánchez 
Alvarado A(3)(4), Ross E(3)(4), Lan Y(1), Sun Y(1), Castro-Vazquez A(5)(6), Vega 
IA(5)(6), Heras H(7)(8), Ituarte S(7), Van Bocxlaer B(9), Hayes KA(10), Cowie 
RH(11), Zhao Z(2), Zhang Y(12), Qian PY(1), Qiu JW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ocean Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 
Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Kansas City, MO.
(4)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO.
(5)Instituto de Histología y Embriología (IHEM-CONICET), Mendoza, Argentina.
(6)Instituto de Fisiología (FCM-UNCuyo), Mendoza, Argentina.
(7)Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de La Plata "Prof. Dr. Rodolfo R. 
Brenner", INIBIOLP. CONICET CCT La Plata-Universidad Nacional de La Plata 
(UNLP), La Plata, Argentina.
(8)Facultad de Ciencias Naturales y Museo, UNLP, La Plata, Argentina.
(9)Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS), UMR 8198 Evolution, 
Ecology, Paleotology, Université de Lille, Lille, France.
(10)Bernice Pauahi Bishop Museum, Honolulu, HI.
(11)Pacific Biosciences Research Center, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI.
(12)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Marine Bioresource and Eco-environmental Science, 
College of Life Sciences and Oceanography, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.

The family Ampullariidae includes both aquatic and amphibious apple snails. They 
are an emerging model for evolutionary studies due to the high diversity, 
ancient history, and wide geographical distribution. Insight into drivers of 
ampullariid evolution is hampered, however, by the lack of genomic resources. 
Here, we report the genomes of four ampullariids spanning the Old World 
(Lanistes nyassanus) and New World (Pomacea canaliculata, P. maculata, and 
Marisa cornuarietis) clades. The ampullariid genomes have conserved ancient 
bilaterial karyotype features and a novel Hox gene cluster rearrangement, making 
them valuable in comparative genomic studies. They have expanded gene families 
related to environmental sensing and cellulose digestion, which may have 
facilitated some ampullarids to become notorious invasive pests. In the 
amphibious Pomacea, novel acquisition of an egg neurotoxin and a protein for 
making the calcareous eggshell may have been key adaptations enabling their 
transition from underwater to terrestrial egg deposition.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz084
PMCID: PMC6573481
PMID: 30980073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1605. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1457-1472. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz079.

Dynamics of Transposable Element Invasions with piRNA Clusters.

Kofler R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Populationsgenetik, Vetmeduni Vienna, Wien, Austria.

In mammals and invertebrates, the proliferation of an invading transposable 
element (TE) is thought to be stopped by an insertion into a piRNA cluster. 
Here, we explore the dynamics of TE invasions under this trap model using 
computer simulations. We found that piRNA clusters confer a substantial benefit, 
effectively preventing extinction of host populations from a proliferation of 
deleterious TEs. TE invasions consist of three distinct phases: first, the TE 
amplifies within the population, next TE proliferation is stopped by segregating 
cluster insertions, and finally the TE is inactivated by fixation of a cluster 
insertion. Suppression by segregating cluster insertions is unstable and bursts 
of TE activity may yet occur. The transposition rate and the population size 
mostly influence the length of the phases but not the amount of TEs accumulating 
during an invasion. Solely, the size of piRNA clusters was identified as a major 
factor influencing TE abundance. We found that a single nonrecombining cluster 
is more efficient in stopping invasions than clusters distributed over several 
chromosomes. Recombination among cluster sites makes it necessary that each 
diploid carries, on the average, four cluster insertions to stop an invasion. 
Surprisingly, negative selection in a model with piRNA clusters can lead to a 
novel equilibrium state, where TE copy numbers remain stable despite only some 
individuals in a population carrying a cluster insertion. In Drosophila 
melanogaster, the trap model accounts for the abundance of TEs produced in the 
germline but fails to predict the abundance of TEs produced in the soma.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz079
PMCID: PMC6573471
PMID: 30968135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1606. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1442-1456. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz078.

Adaptation to Plant Communities across the Genome of Arabidopsis thaliana.

Frachon L(1)(2)(3), Mayjonade B(1), Bartoli C(1)(4), Hautekèete NC(5), Roux 
F(1).

Author information:
(1)LIPM, Université de Toulouse, INRA, CNRS, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
(2)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, 
Naples, Italy.
(3)Department of Systematic and Evolutionary Botany, University of Zürich, 
Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)IGEPP, INRA, AGROCAMPUS OUEST, Université Rennes, Le Rheu, France.
(5)Laboratoire Evolution, Ecologie et Paléontologie, CNRS UMR 8198, Université 
de Lille, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France.

Despite the importance of plant-plant interactions on plant community dynamics 
and crop yield, our understanding of the adaptive genetics underlying these 
interactions is still limited and deserves to be investigated in the context of 
complex and diffuse interactions occurring in plant assemblages. Here, based on 
145 natural populations of Arabidopsis thaliana located in south-west of France 
and characterized for plant communities, we conducted a Genome-Environment 
Association analysis to finely map adaptive genomic regions of A. thaliana 
associated with plant community descriptors. To control for correlated abiotic 
environment effects, we also characterized the populations for a set of 
biologically meaningful climate and soil variables. A nonnegligible fraction of 
top single nucleotide polymorphisms was associated with both plant community 
descriptors and abiotic variables, highlighting the importance of considering 
the actual abiotic drivers of plant communities to disentangle genetic variants 
for biotic adaptation from genetic variants for abiotic adaptation. The adaptive 
loci associated with species abundance were highly dependent on the identity of 
the neighboring species suggesting a high degree of biotic specialization of A. 
thaliana to members of its plant interaction network. Moreover, the 
identification of adaptive loci associated with α-diversity and composition of 
plant communities supports the ability of A. thaliana to interact simultaneously 
with multiple plant neighbors, which in turn can help to understand the role of 
community-wide selection. Altogether, our study highlights that dissecting the 
genetic basis underlying plant-plant interactions at a regional scale while 
controlling for abiotic confounding factors can help understanding the adaptive 
mechanisms modulating natural plant assemblages.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz078
PMID: 30968130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1607. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1473-1480. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz080.

The Interaction of Natural Selection and GC Skew May Drive the Fast Evolution of 
a Sand Rat Homeobox Gene.

Dai Y(1), Holland PWH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Several processes can lead to strong GC skew in localized genomic regions. In 
most cases, GC skew should not affect conserved amino acids because natural 
selection will purge deleterious alleles. However, in the gerbil subfamily of 
rodents, several conserved genes have undergone radical alteration in 
association with strong GC skew. An extreme example concerns the highly 
conserved homeobox gene Pdx1, which is uniquely divergent and GC rich in the 
sand rat Psammomys obesus and close relatives. Here, we investigate the 
antagonistic interplay between very rare amino acid changes driven by GC skew 
and the force of natural selection. Using ectopic protein expression in cell 
culture, pulse-chase labeling, in vitro mutagenesis, and drug treatment, we 
compare properties of mouse and sand rat Pdx1 proteins. We find that amino acid 
change driven by GC skew resulted in altered protein stability, with a 
significantly longer protein half-life for sand rat Pdx1. Using a reversible 
inhibitor of the 26S proteasome, MG132, we find that sand rat and mouse Pdx1 are 
both degraded through the ubiquitin proteasome pathway. However, in vitro 
mutagenesis reveals this pathway operates through different amino acid residues. 
We propose that GC skew caused loss of a key ubiquitination site, conserved 
through vertebrate evolution, and that sand rat Pdx1 evolved or fixed a new 
ubiquitination site to compensate. Our results give molecular insight into the 
power of natural selection in the face of maladaptive changes driven by strong 
GC skew.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz080
PMCID: PMC6573468
PMID: 30968125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1608. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Sep 1;36(9):2040-2052. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz081.

Robust Estimation of Recent Effective Population Size from Number of Independent 
Origins in Soft Sweeps.

Khatri BS(1)(2), Burt A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, Ascot, Berkshire, 
United Kingdom.
(2)The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom.

Estimating recent effective population size is of great importance in 
characterizing and predicting the evolution of natural populations. Methods 
based on nucleotide diversity may underestimate current day effective population 
sizes due to historical bottlenecks, whereas methods that reconstruct 
demographic history typically only detect long-term variations. However, soft 
selective sweeps, which leave a fingerprint of mutational history by recurrent 
mutations on independent haplotype backgrounds, holds promise of an estimate 
more representative of recent population history. Here, we present a simple and 
robust method of estimation based only on knowledge of the number of independent 
recurrent origins and the current frequency of the beneficial allele in a 
population sample, independent of the strength of selection and age of the 
mutation. Using a forward-time theoretical framework, we show the mean number of 
origins is a function of θ=2Nμ and current allele frequency, through a simple 
equation, and the distribution is approximately Poisson. This estimate is robust 
to whether mutants preexisted before selection arose and is equally accurate for 
diploid populations with incomplete dominance. For fast (e.g., seasonal) 
demographic changes compared with time scale for fixation of the mutant allele, 
and for moderate peak-to-trough ratios, we show our constant population size 
estimate can be used to bound the maximum and minimum population size. Applied 
to the Vgsc gene of Anopheles gambiae, we estimate an effective population size 
of roughly 6×107, and including seasonal demographic oscillations, a minimum 
effective population size >3×107, and a maximum <6×109, suggesting a mean ∼109.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz081
PMCID: PMC6736332
PMID: 30968124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1609. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1358. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz076.

Different Genomic Changes Underlie Adaptive Evolution in Populations of 
Contrasting History.

Seabra SG, Fragata I, Antunes MA, Faria GS, Santos MA, Sousa VC, Simões P, Matos 
M.

Erratum for
    Mol Biol Evol. 2017 Sep 18;:null.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz076
PMID: 30958887


1610. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1628-1642. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz037.

Ancestry-Specific Analyses Reveal Differential Demographic Histories and 
Opposite Selective Pressures in Modern South Asian Populations.

Yelmen B(1)(2), Mondal M(1), Marnetto D(1), Pathak AK(1)(2), Montinaro F(1)(3), 
Gallego Romero I(4), Kivisild T(1)(5), Metspalu M(1), Pagani L(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(2)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)Melbourne Integrative Genomics and School of BioSciences, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)APE Lab, Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Aug 1;36(8):1846.

Genetic variation in contemporary South Asian populations follows a northwest to 
southeast decreasing cline of shared West Eurasian ancestry. A growing body of 
ancient DNA evidence is being used to build increasingly more realistic models 
of demographic changes in the last few thousand years. Through high-quality 
modern genomes, these models can be tested for gene and genome level deviations. 
Using local ancestry deconvolution and masking, we reconstructed 
population-specific surrogates of the two main ancestral components for more 
than 500 samples from 25 South Asian populations and showed our approach to be 
robust via coalescent simulations. Our f3 and f4 statistics-based estimates 
reveal that the reconstructed haplotypes are good proxies for the source 
populations that admixed in the area and point to complex interpopulation 
relationships within the West Eurasian component, compatible with multiple waves 
of arrival, as opposed to a simpler one wave scenario. Our approach also 
provides reliable local haplotypes for future downstream analyses. As one such 
example, the local ancestry deconvolution in South Asians reveals opposite 
selective pressures on two pigmentation genes (SLC45A2 and SLC24A5) that are 
common or fixed in West Eurasians, suggesting post-admixture purifying and 
positive selection signals, respectively.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz037
PMCID: PMC6657728
PMID: 30952160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1611. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1239-1253. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz063.

Paternally Expressed Imprinted Genes under Positive Darwinian Selection in 
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Tuteja R(1)(2), McKeown PC(1), Ryan P(1), Morgan CC(3)(4), Donoghue MTA(1)(5), 
Downing T(3), O'Connell MJ(6)(7), Spillane C(1).

Author information:
(1)Genetics & Biotechnology Lab, Plant & AgriBiosciences Research Centre (PABC), 
School of Natural Sciences, Ryan Institute, National University of Ireland 
Galway, Galway, Ireland.
(2)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, New York, NY.
(3)School of Biotechnology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Dublin City 
University, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Imperial College London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(5)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(6)Computational and Molecular Evolutionary Biology Research Group, School of 
Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, The University of Leeds, Leeds, United 
Kingdom.
(7)Computational and Molecular Evolutionary Biology Group, School of Life 
Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic phenomenon where autosomal genes display 
uniparental expression depending on whether they are maternally or paternally 
inherited. Genomic imprinting can arise from parental conflicts over resource 
allocation to the offspring, which could drive imprinted loci to evolve by 
positive selection. We investigate whether positive selection is associated with 
genomic imprinting in the inbreeding species Arabidopsis thaliana. Our analysis 
of 140 genes regulated by genomic imprinting in the A. thaliana seed endosperm 
demonstrates they are evolving more rapidly than expected. To investigate 
whether positive selection drives this evolutionary acceleration, we identified 
orthologs of each imprinted gene across 34 plant species and elucidated their 
evolutionary trajectories. Increased positive selection was sought by comparing 
its incidence among imprinted genes with nonimprinted controls. Strikingly, we 
find a statistically significant enrichment of imprinted paternally expressed 
genes (iPEGs) evolving under positive selection, 50.6% of the total, but no such 
enrichment for positive selection among imprinted maternally expressed genes 
(iMEGs). This suggests that maternally- and paternally expressed imprinted genes 
are subject to different selective pressures. Almost all positively selected 
amino acids were fixed across 80 sequenced A. thaliana accessions, suggestive of 
selective sweeps in the A. thaliana lineage. The imprinted genes under positive 
selection are involved in processes important for seed development including 
auxin biosynthesis and epigenetic regulation. Our findings support a genomic 
imprinting model for plants where positive selection can affect paternally 
expressed genes due to continued conflict with maternal sporophyte tissues, even 
when parental conflict is reduced in predominantly inbreeding species.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz063
PMCID: PMC6526901
PMID: 30913563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1612. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1281-1293. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz074.

Evidence for Faster X Chromosome Evolution in Spiders.

Bechsgaard J(1), Schou MF(1)(2), Vanthournout B(1)(3), Hendrickx F(4)(5), 
Knudsen B(6), Settepani V(1), Schierup MH(1)(7), Bilde T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience, Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.
(2)Department of Biology, Lund University, SE-223 62 Lund, Sweden.
(3)Evolution and Optics of Nanostructure Group (EON), Biology Department, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Terrestrial Ecology Unit (TEREC), Biology Department, Ghent University, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(6)Qiagen Bioinformatics, Aarhus, Denmark.
(7)Bioinformatics Research Centre (BiRC), Aarhus University, Aarhus C, Denmark.

In species with chromosomal sex determination, X chromosomes are predicted to 
evolve faster than autosomes because of positive selection on recessive alleles 
or weak purifying selection. We investigated X chromosome evolution in 
Stegodyphus spiders that differ in mating system, sex ratio, and population 
dynamics. We assigned scaffolds to X chromosomes and autosomes using a novel 
method based on flow cytometry of sperm cells and reduced representation 
sequencing. We estimated coding substitution patterns (dN/dS) in a subsocial 
outcrossing species (S. africanus) and its social inbreeding and female-biased 
sister species (S. mimosarum), and found evidence for faster-X evolution in both 
species. X chromosome-to-autosome diversity (piX/piA) ratios were estimated in 
multiple populations. The average piX/piA estimates of S. africanus (0.57 [95% 
CI: 0.55-0.60]) was lower than the neutral expectation of 0.75, consistent with 
more hitchhiking events on X-linked loci and/or a lower X chromosome mutation 
rate, and we provide evidence in support of both. The social species S. 
mimosarum has a significantly higher piX/piA ratio (0.72 [95% CI: 0.65-0.79]) in 
agreement with its female-biased sex ratio. Stegodyphus mimosarum also have 
different piX/piA estimates among populations, which we interpret as evidence 
for recurrent founder events. Simulations show that recurrent founder events are 
expected to decrease the piX/piA estimates in S. mimosarum, thus underestimating 
the true effect of female-biased sex ratios. Finally, we found lower synonymous 
divergence on X chromosomes in both species, and the male-to-female substitution 
ratio to be higher than 1, indicating a higher mutation rate in males.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz074
PMCID: PMC6526907
PMID: 30912801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1613. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1430-1441. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz075.

Tumorigenesis as the Paradigm of Quasi-neutral Molecular Evolution.

Chen B(1), Shi Z(1), Chen Q(1), Shen X(1), Shibata D(2), Wen H(1), Wu 
CI(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine of the University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

In the absence of both positive and negative selections, coding sequences evolve 
at a neutral rate (R = 1). Such a high genomic rate is generally not achievable 
due to the prevalence of negative selection against codon substitutions. 
Remarkably, somatic evolution exhibits the seemingly neutral rate R ∼ 1 across 
normal and cancerous tissues. Nevertheless, R ∼ 1 may also mean that positive 
and negative selections are both strong, but equal in intensity. We refer to 
this regime as quasi-neutral. Indeed, individual genes in cancer cells often 
evolve at a much higher, or lower, rate than R ∼ 1. Here, we show that 1) 
quasi-neutrality is much more likely when populations are small (N < 50); 2) 
stem-cell populations in single normal tissue niches, from which tumors likely 
emerge, have a small N (usually <50) but selection at this stage is measurable 
and strong; 3) when N dips below 50, selection efficacy decreases precipitously; 
and 4) notably, N is smaller in the stem-cell niche of the small intestine than 
in the colon. Hence, the ∼70-fold higher rate of phenotypic evolution (observed 
as cancer risk) in the latter can be explained by the greater efficacy of 
selection, which then leads to the fixation of more advantageous and fewer 
deleterious mutations in colon cancers. In conclusion, quasi-neutral evolution 
sheds a new light on a general evolutionary principle that helps to explain 
aspects of cancer evolution.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz075
PMCID: PMC7967884
PMID: 30912799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1614. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1344-1356. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz067.

Inadvertent Paralog Inclusion Drives Artifactual Topologies and Timetree 
Estimates in Phylogenomics.

Siu-Ting K(1)(2)(3), Torres-Sánchez M(4)(5), San Mauro D(4), Wilcockson D(6), 
Wilkinson M(7), Pisani D(8), O'Connell MJ(9)(10), Creevey CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Global Food Security, School of Biological Sciences, Queen's 
University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Biotechnology, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Dpto. de Herpetología, Museo de Historia Natural, Universidad Nacional Mayor 
de San Marcos, Lima, Perú.
(4)Department of Biodiversity, Ecology, and Evolution, Complutense University of 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Spinal Cord and Brain Injury Research Center and 
Ambystoma Genetic Stock Center, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY.
(6)Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences, Aberystwyth 
University, Aberystwyth, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Life Sciences, Natural History Museum, London, United Kingdom.
(8)Life Sciences Building, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(9)School of Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, United Kingdom.
(10)School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, United 
Kingdom.

Increasingly, large phylogenomic data sets include transcriptomic data from 
nonmodel organisms. This not only has allowed controversial and unexplored 
evolutionary relationships in the tree of life to be addressed but also 
increases the risk of inadvertent inclusion of paralogs in the analysis. 
Although this may be expected to result in decreased phylogenetic support, it is 
not clear if it could also drive highly supported artifactual relationships. 
Many groups, including the hyperdiverse Lissamphibia, are especially susceptible 
to these issues due to ancient gene duplication events and small numbers of 
sequenced genomes and because transcriptomes are increasingly applied to resolve 
historically conflicting taxonomic hypotheses. We tested the potential impact of 
paralog inclusion on the topologies and timetree estimates of the Lissamphibia 
using published and de novo sequencing data including 18 amphibian species, from 
which 2,656 single-copy gene families were identified. A novel paralog filtering 
approach resulted in four differently curated data sets, which were used for 
phylogenetic reconstructions using Bayesian inference, maximum likelihood, and 
quartet-based supertrees. We found that paralogs drive strongly supported 
conflicting hypotheses within the Lissamphibia (Batrachia and Procera) and older 
divergence time estimates even within groups where no variation in topology was 
observed. All investigated methods, except Bayesian inference with the CAT-GTR 
model, were found to be sensitive to paralogs, but with filtering convergence to 
the same answer (Batrachia) was observed. This is the first large-scale study to 
address the impact of orthology selection using transcriptomic data and 
emphasizes the importance of quality over quantity particularly for 
understanding relationships of poorly sampled taxa.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz067
PMCID: PMC6526904
PMID: 30903171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1615. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1270-1280. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz068.

Complete Inactivation of Sebum-Producing Genes Parallels the Loss of Sebaceous 
Glands in Cetacea.

Lopes-Marques M(1), Machado AM(1), Alves LQ(1)(2), Fonseca MM(1), Barbosa S(1), 
Sinding MS(3), Rasmussen MH(4), Iversen MR(4), Frost Bertelsen M(5), Campos 
PF(1)(6), da Fonseca R(6)(7), Ruivo R(1), Castro LFC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)CIIMAR-Interdisciplinary Centre of Marine and Environmental Research, U. 
Porto-University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, U. Porto-University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(3)Greenland Institute of Natural Resources, Nuuk, Greenland.
(4)The University of Iceland's Research Center in Húsavík, Húsavík, Iceland.
(5)Centre for Zoo and Wild Animal Health, Copenhagen Zoo, Frederiksberg, 
Denmark.
(6)Department of Biology, The Bioinformatics Centre, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Center for Macroecology, Evolution, and Climate, Natural History Museum of 
Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Genomes are dynamic biological units, with processes of gene duplication and 
loss triggering evolutionary novelty. The mammalian skin provides a remarkable 
case study on the occurrence of adaptive morphological innovations. Skin 
sebaceous glands (SGs), for instance, emerged in the ancestor of mammals serving 
pivotal roles, such as lubrication, waterproofing, immunity, and 
thermoregulation, through the secretion of sebum, a complex mixture of various 
neutral lipids such as triacylglycerol, free fatty acids, wax esters, 
cholesterol, and squalene. Remarkably, SGs are absent in a few mammalian 
lineages, including the iconic Cetacea. We investigated the evolution of the key 
molecular components responsible for skin sebum production: Dgat2l6, Awat1, 
Awat2, Elovl3, Mogat3, and Fabp9. We show that all analyzed genes have been 
rendered nonfunctional in Cetacea species (toothed and baleen whales). 
Transcriptomic analysis, including a novel skin transcriptome from blue whale, 
supports gene inactivation. The conserved mutational pattern found in most 
analyzed genes, indicates that pseudogenization events took place prior to the 
diversification of modern Cetacea lineages. Genome and skin transcriptome 
analysis of the common hippopotamus highlighted the convergent loss of a subset 
of sebum-producing genes, notably Awat1 and Mogat3. Partial loss profiles were 
also detected in non-Cetacea aquatic mammals, such as the Florida manatee, and 
in terrestrial mammals displaying specialized skin phenotypes such as the 
African elephant, white rhinoceros and pig. Our findings reveal a unique 
landscape of "gene vestiges" in the Cetacea sebum-producing compartment, with 
limited gene loss observed in other mammalian lineages: suggestive of specific 
adaptations or specializations of skin lipids.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz068
PMCID: PMC6526905
PMID: 30895322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1616. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1373-1383. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz065.

Gene Expression Does Not Support the Developmental Hourglass Model in Three 
Animals with Spiralian Development.

Wu L(1), Ferger KE(1), Lambert JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY.

It has been proposed that animals have a pattern of developmental evolution 
resembling an hourglass because the most conserved development stage-often 
called the phylotypic stage-is always in midembryonic development. Although the 
topic has been debated for decades, recent studies using molecular data such as 
RNA-seq gene expression data sets have largely supported the existence of 
periods of relative evolutionary conservation in middevelopment, consistent with 
the phylotypic stage and the hourglass concepts. However, so far this approach 
has only been applied to a limited number of taxa across the tree of life. Here, 
using established phylotranscriptomic approaches, we found a surprising reverse 
hourglass pattern in two molluscs and a polychaete annelid, representatives of 
the Spiralia, an understudied group that contains a large fraction of metazoan 
body plan diversity. These results suggest that spiralians have a divergent 
midembryonic stage, with more conserved early and late development, which is the 
inverse of the pattern seen in almost all other organisms where these 
phylotranscriptomic approaches have been reported. We discuss our findings in 
light of proposed reasons for the phylotypic stage and hourglass model in other 
systems.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz065
PMID: 30895314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1617. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1254-1269. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz066.

Dissecting the Pre-Columbian Genomic Ancestry of Native Americans along the 
Andes-Amazonia Divide.

Gnecchi-Ruscone GA(1)(2), Sarno S(1), De Fanti S(1), Gianvincenzo L(1), Giuliani 
C(1), Boattini A(1), Bortolini E(3), Di Corcia T(4), Sanchez Mellado C(5), 
Dàvila Francia TJ(5), Gentilini D(6), Di Blasio AM(6), Di Cosimo P(7), Cilli 
E(3), Gonzalez-Martin A(8), Franceschi C(9), Franceschi ZA(10), Rickards O(4), 
Sazzini M(1), Luiselli D(3), Pettener D(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Anthropology and Centre for Genome Biology, 
Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Archaeogenetics, Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human 
History, Jena, Germany.
(3)Department of Cultural Heritage, University of Bologna, Ravenna, Italy.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(5)Faculty of Intercultural Education and Humanity, National Intercultural 
University of Amazon, Ucayali, Peru.
(6)Center for Biomedical Research and Technologies, Italian Auxologic Institute 
IRCCS, Milan, Italy.
(7)Takesi Project, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(8)Department of Zoology and Physical Anthropology, Complutense University of 
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(10)Department of History and Cultures, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Extensive European and African admixture coupled with loss of Amerindian 
lineages makes the reconstruction of pre-Columbian history of Native Americans 
based on present-day genomes extremely challenging. Still open questions remain 
about the dispersals that occurred throughout the continent after the initial 
peopling from the Beringia, especially concerning the number and dynamics of 
diffusions into South America. Indeed, if environmental and historical factors 
contributed to shape distinct gene pools in the Andes and Amazonia, the origins 
of this East-West genetic structure and the extension of further interactions 
between populations residing along this divide are still not well understood. To 
this end, we generated new high-resolution genome-wide data for 229 individuals 
representative of one Central and ten South Amerindian ethnic groups from 
Mexico, Peru, Bolivia, and Argentina. Low levels of European and African 
admixture in the sampled individuals allowed the application of fine-scale 
haplotype-based methods and demographic modeling approaches. These analyses 
revealed highly specific Native American genetic ancestries and great intragroup 
homogeneity, along with limited traces of gene flow mainly from the Andes into 
Peruvian Amazonians. Substantial amount of genetic drift differentially 
experienced by the considered populations underlined distinct patterns of recent 
inbreeding or prolonged isolation. Overall, our results support the hypothesis 
that all non-Andean South Americans are compatible with descending from a common 
lineage, while we found low support for common Mesoamerican ancestors of both 
Andeans and other South American groups. These findings suggest extensive 
back-migrations into Central America from non-Andean sources or conceal distinct 
peopling events into the Southern Continent.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz066
PMCID: PMC6526910
PMID: 30895292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1618. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1333-1343. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz058.

Transmission Trees on a Known Pathogen Phylogeny: Enumeration and Sampling.

Hall MD(1), Colijn C(2).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Medicine, Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for 
Health Information and Discovery, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, Canada.

One approach to the reconstruction of infectious disease transmission trees from 
pathogen genomic data has been to use a phylogenetic tree, reconstructed from 
pathogen sequences, and annotate its internal nodes to provide a reconstruction 
of which host each lineage was in at each point in time. If only one pathogen 
lineage can be transmitted to a new host (i.e., the transmission bottleneck is 
complete), this corresponds to partitioning the nodes of the phylogeny into 
connected regions, each of which represents evolution in an individual host. 
These partitions define the possible transmission trees that are consistent with 
a given phylogenetic tree. However, the mathematical properties of the 
transmission trees given a phylogeny remain largely unexplored. Here, we 
describe a procedure to calculate the number of possible transmission trees for 
a given phylogeny, and we then show how to uniformly sample from these 
transmission trees. The procedure is outlined for situations where one sample is 
available from each host and trees do not have branch lengths, and we also 
provide extensions for incomplete sampling, multiple sampling, and the 
application to time trees in a situation where limits on the period during which 
each host could have been infected and infectious are known. The sampling 
algorithm is available as an R package (STraTUS).

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz058
PMCID: PMC6526902
PMID: 30873529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1619. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1215-1219. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz057.

Evolutionary Rates of Bumblebee Genomes Are Faster at Lower Elevations.

Lin G(1)(2)(3), Huang Z(1), Wang L(2), Chen Z(4), Zhang T(2)(3), Gillman LN(5), 
Zhao F(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jinggangshan University, Ji'an, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest 
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, China.
(3)Qinghai Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Ecological Genomics, Xining, 
China.
(4)Qinghai-CAS Institute of Apicultural Research, Xining, Qinghai, China.
(5)Institute for Applied Ecology New Zealand, School of Science, Auckland 
University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand.

The importance of climate in determining biodiversity patterns has been well 
documented. However, the relationship between climate and rates of genetic 
evolution remains controversial. Latitude and elevation have been associated 
with rates of change in genetic markers such as cytochrome b. What is not known, 
however, is the strength of such associations and whether patterns found among 
these genes apply across entire genomes. Here, using bumblebee genetic data from 
seven subgenera of Bombus, we demonstrate that all species occupying warmer 
elevations have undergone faster genome-wide evolution than those in the same 
subgenera occupying cooler elevations. Our findings point to a critical 
biogeographic role in the relative rates of whole species evolution, potentially 
influencing global biodiversity patterns.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz057
PMCID: PMC6526908
PMID: 30865278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1620. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1405-1417. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz059.

The Genome of Drosophila innubila Reveals Lineage-Specific Patterns of Selection 
in Immune Genes.

Hill T(1), Koseva BS(2), Unckless RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.
(2)K-INBRE Bioinformatics Core, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS.

Pathogenic microbes can exert extraordinary evolutionary pressure on their 
hosts. They can spread rapidly and sicken or even kill their host to promote 
their own proliferation. Because of this strong selective pressure, immune genes 
are some of the fastest evolving genes across metazoans, as highlighted in 
mammals and insects. Drosophila melanogaster serves as a powerful model for 
studying host/pathogen evolution. While Drosophila melanogaster are frequently 
exposed to various pathogens, little is known about D. melanogaster's ecology, 
or if they are representative of other Drosophila species in terms of pathogen 
pressure. Here, we characterize the genome of Drosophila innubila, a 
mushroom-feeding species highly diverged from D. melanogaster and investigate 
the evolution of the immune system. We find substantial differences in the rates 
of evolution of immune pathways between D. innubila and D. melanogaster. 
Contrasting what was previously found for D. melanogaster, we find little 
evidence of rapid evolution of the antiviral RNAi genes and high rates of 
evolution in the Toll pathway. This suggests that, while immune genes tend to be 
rapidly evolving in most species, the specific genes that are fastest evolving 
may depend either on the pathogens faced by the host and/or divergence in the 
basic architecture of the host's immune system.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz059
PMCID: PMC6573480
PMID: 30865231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1621. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1220-1238. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz060.

Emergence of a Thrombospondin Superfamily at the Origin of Metazoans.

Shoemark DK(1), Ziegler B(2), Watanabe H(3), Strompen J(2), Tucker RP(4), Özbek 
S(2), Adams JC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Organismal Studies, Department of Molecular Evolution and 
Genomics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Evolutionary Neurobiology Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology 
Graduate University, Okinawa, Japan.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California at 
Davis, Davis, CA.

Extracellular matrix (ECM) is considered central to the evolution of metazoan 
multicellularity; however, the repertoire of ECM proteins in nonbilaterians 
remains unclear. Thrombospondins (TSPs) are known to be well conserved from 
cnidarians to vertebrates, yet to date have been considered a unique family, 
principally studied for matricellular functions in vertebrates. Through searches 
utilizing the highly conserved C-terminal region of TSPs, we identify 
undisclosed new families of TSP-related proteins in metazoans, designated 
mega-TSP, sushi-TSP, and poriferan-TSP, each with a distinctive phylogenetic 
distribution. These proteins share the TSP C-terminal region domain 
architecture, as determined by domain composition and analysis of molecular 
models against known structures. Mega-TSPs, the only form identified in 
ctenophores, are typically >2,700 aa and are also characterized by N-terminal 
leucine-rich repeats and central cadherin/immunoglobulin domains. In cnidarians, 
which have a well-defined ECM, Mega-TSP was expressed throughout embryogenesis 
in Nematostella vectensis, with dynamic endodermal expression in larvae and 
primary polyps and widespread ectodermal expression in adult Nematostella 
vectensis and Hydra magnipapillata polyps. Hydra Mega-TSP was also expressed 
during regeneration and siRNA-silencing of Mega-TSP in Hydra caused specific 
blockade of head regeneration. Molecular phylogenetic analyses based on the 
conserved TSP C-terminal region identified each of the TSP-related groups to 
form clades distinct from the canonical TSPs. We discuss models for the 
evolution of the newly defined TSP superfamily by gene duplications, radiation, 
and gene losses from a debut in the last metazoan common ancestor. Together, the 
data provide new insight into the evolution of ECM and tissue organization in 
metazoans.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz060
PMCID: PMC6526912
PMID: 30863851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1622. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1580-1595. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz053.

Phylogenetic Clustering by Linear Integer Programming (PhyCLIP).

Han AX(1)(2)(3), Parker E(3)(4), Scholer F(5), Maurer-Stroh S(1)(2)(6), Russell 
CA(3).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 
(A*STAR), Singapore.
(2)NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National 
University of Singapore (NUS), Singapore.
(3)Laboratory of Applied Evolutionary Biology, Department of Medical 
Microbiology, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Academic Medical Centre, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 
Singapore.

Subspecies nomenclature systems of pathogens are increasingly based on sequence 
data. The use of phylogenetics to identify and differentiate between clusters of 
genetically similar pathogens is particularly prevalent in virology from the 
nomenclature of human papillomaviruses to highly pathogenic avian influenza 
(HPAI) H5Nx viruses. These nomenclature systems rely on absolute genetic 
distance thresholds to define the maximum genetic divergence tolerated between 
viruses designated as closely related. However, the phylogenetic clustering 
methods used in these nomenclature systems are limited by the arbitrariness of 
setting intra and intercluster diversity thresholds. The lack of a consensus 
ground truth to define well-delineated, meaningful phylogenetic subpopulations 
amplifies the difficulties in identifying an informative distance threshold. 
Consequently, phylogenetic clustering often becomes an exploratory, ad hoc 
exercise. Phylogenetic Clustering by Linear Integer Programming (PhyCLIP) was 
developed to provide a statistically principled phylogenetic clustering 
framework that negates the need for an arbitrarily defined distance threshold. 
Using the pairwise patristic distance distributions of an input phylogeny, 
PhyCLIP parameterizes the intra and intercluster divergence limits as 
statistical bounds in an integer linear programming model which is subsequently 
optimized to cluster as many sequences as possible. When applied to the 
hemagglutinin phylogeny of HPAI H5Nx viruses, PhyCLIP was not only able to 
recapitulate the current WHO/OIE/FAO H5 nomenclature system but also further 
delineated informative higher resolution clusters that capture geographically 
distinct subpopulations of viruses. PhyCLIP is pathogen-agnostic and can be 
generalized to a wide variety of research questions concerning the 
identification of biologically informative clusters in pathogen phylogenies. 
PhyCLIP is freely available at http://github.com/alvinxhan/PhyCLIP, last 
accessed March 15, 2019.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz053
PMCID: PMC6573476
PMID: 30854550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1623. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1172-1186. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz050.

Cluster-Transition Determining Sites Underlying the Antigenic Evolution of 
Seasonal Influenza Viruses.

Quan L(1)(2), Ji C(1), Ding X(1), Peng Y(3), Liu M(4), Sun J(1), Jiang T(1), Wu 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Systems Medicine, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Suzhou Institute of 
Systems Medicine, Suzhou, China.
(2)School of Computer Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(3)College of Biology, Human University, Changsha, China.
(4)Jiangsu Institute of Clinical Immunology & Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Clinical 
Immunology, First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.

Seasonal influenza viruses undergo frequent mutations on their surface 
hemagglutinin (HA) proteins to escape the host immune response. In these 
mutations, a few key amino acid sites are associated with significant antigenic 
cluster transitions. To recognize the cluster-transition determining sites of 
seasonal influenza A/H3N2 and A/H1N1 viruses systematically and quickly, we 
developed a computational model named RECDS (recognition of cluster-transition 
determining sites) to evaluate the contribution of a specific amino acid site on 
the HA protein in the whole history of antigenic evolution. In RECDS, we ranked 
all of the HA sites by calculating the contribution scores derived from the 
forest of gradient boosting classifiers trained by various sequence- and 
structure-based features. With the RECDS model, we found out that the sites 
determining influenza antigenicity were mostly around the receptor-binding 
domain both for the influenza A/H3N2 and A/H1N1 viruses. Specifically, half of 
the cluster-transition determining sites of the influenza A/H1N1 virus were 
located in the vestigial esterase domain and basic path area on the HA, which 
indicated that the differential driving force of the antigenic evolution of the 
A/H1N1 virus refers to the A/H3N2 virus. Beyond that, the footprints of 
substitutions responsible for antigenic evolution were inferred according to the 
phylogenetic trees for the cluster-transition determining sites. The monitoring 
of genetic variation occurring at these cluster-transition determining sites in 
circulating influenza viruses on a large scale will potentially reduce current 
assay workloads in influenza surveillance and the selection of new influenza 
vaccine strains.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz050
PMID: 30851115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1624. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1596-1597. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz054.

On the Number of Functional microRNA Targets.

Seitz H(1).

Author information:
(1)IGH, CNRS-University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2017 Dec 1;34(12):3041-3046.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz054
PMID: 30851114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1625. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1598-1599. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz055.

Weak Regulation of Many Targets Is Cumulatively Powerful-A Reply to Seitz on 
microRNA Functionality.

Zhao Y(1)(2), Shen X(1), Tang T(1), Wu CI(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Simons Center for Quantitative Biology, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold 
Spring Harbor, NY.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Comment on
    Mol Biol Evol. 2017 Dec 1;34(12):3041-3046.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz055
PMID: 30851090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1626. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1187-1200. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz051.

Mitochondrial Genomics Reveals Shared Phylogeographic Patterns and Demographic 
History among Three Periodical Cicada Species Groups.

Du Z(1), Hasegawa H(2), Cooley JR(3), Simon C(3), Yoshimura J(4)(5)(6), Cai 
W(1), Sota T(2), Li H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology and MOA Key Lab of Pest Monitoring and Green 
Management, College of Plant Protection, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo, 
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT.
(4)Graduate School of Science and Technology and Department of Mathematical and 
Systems Engineering, Shizuoka University, Hamamatsu, Japan.
(5)Department of Environmental and Forest Biology, State University of New York 
College of Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse, NY.
(6)Marine Biosystems Research Center, Chiba University, Kamogawa, Chiba, Japan.

The mass application of whole mitogenome (MG) sequencing has great potential for 
resolving complex phylogeographic patterns that cannot be resolved by partial 
mitogenomic sequences or nuclear markers. North American periodical cicadas 
(Magicicada) are well known for their periodical mass emergence at 17- and 
13-year intervals in the north and south, respectively. Magicicada comprises 
three species groups, each containing one 17-year species and one or two 13-year 
species. Within each life cycle, single-aged cohorts, called broods, of 
periodical cicadas emerge in different years, and most broods contain members of 
all three species groups. There are 12 and three extant broods of 17- and 
13-year cicadas, respectively. The phylogeographic relationships among the 
populations and broods within the species groups have not been clearly resolved. 
We analyzed 125 whole MG sequences from all broods and seven species within 
three species groups to ascertain the divergence history of the geographic and 
allochronic populations and their life cycles. Our mitogenomic phylogeny 
analysis clearly revealed that each of the three species groups had largely 
similar phylogeographic subdivisions (east, middle, and west) and demographic 
histories (rapid population expansion after the last glacial period). The 
mitogenomic phylogeny also partly resolved the brood diversification process, 
which could be explained by hypothetical temporary life cycle shifts, and showed 
that none of the 13- and 17-year species within the species groups was 
monophyletic, possibly due to gene flow between them. Our findings clearly 
reveal phylogeographic structures in the three Magicicada species groups, 
demonstrating the advantage of whole MG sequence data in phylogeographic 
studies.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz051
PMCID: PMC6526903
PMID: 30850829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1627. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1316-1332. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz048.

Large-Scale Comparative Analysis of Codon Models Accounting for Protein and 
Nucleotide Selection.

Davydov II(1)(2)(3), Salamin N(1)(3), Robinson-Rechavi M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biology, Biophore, University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Ecology and Evolution, Biophore, University of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland.

There are numerous sources of variation in the rate of synonymous substitutions 
inside genes, such as direct selection on the nucleotide sequence, or mutation 
rate variation. Yet scans for positive selection rely on codon models which 
incorporate an assumption of effectively neutral synonymous substitution rate, 
constant between sites of each gene. Here we perform a large-scale comparison of 
approaches which incorporate codon substitution rate variation and propose our 
own simple yet effective modification of existing models. We find strong effects 
of substitution rate variation on positive selection inference. More than 70% of 
the genes detected by the classical branch-site model are presumably false 
positives caused by the incorrect assumption of uniform synonymous substitution 
rate. We propose a new model which is strongly favored by the data while 
remaining computationally tractable. With the new model we can capture 
signatures of nucleotide level selection acting on translation initiation and on 
splicing sites within the coding region. Finally, we show that rate variation is 
highest in the highly recombining regions, and we propose that recombination and 
mutation rate variation, such as high CpG mutation rate, are the two main 
sources of nucleotide rate variation. Although we detect fewer genes under 
positive selection in Drosophila than without rate variation, the genes which we 
detect contain a stronger signal of adaptation of dynein, which could be 
associated with Wolbachia infection. We provide software to perform positive 
selection analysis using the new model.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz048
PMCID: PMC6526913
PMID: 30847475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1628. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1302-1315. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz046.

Identifying Lineage-Specific Targets of Natural Selection by a Bayesian Analysis 
of Genomic Polymorphisms and Divergence from Multiple Species.

Zhao S(1)(2), Zhang T(3)(4), Liu Q(1)(2), Wu H(1)(2), Su B(3)(5), Shi P(3)(5), 
Chen H(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of 
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of 
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, China.
(4)Kunming College of Life Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming, China.
(5)Center for Excellence in Animal Evolution and Genetics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Kunming, China.

We present a method that jointly analyzes the polymorphism and divergence sites 
in genomic sequences of multiple species to identify the genes under natural 
selection and pinpoint the occurrence time of selection to a specific lineage of 
the species phylogeny. This method integrates population genetics models using a 
Bayesian Poisson random field framework and combines information over all gene 
loci to boost the power for detecting selection. The method provides posterior 
distributions of the fitness effects of each gene along with parameters 
associated with the evolutionary history, including the species divergence time 
and effective population size of external species. The results of simulations 
demonstrate that our method achieves a high power to identify genes under 
positive selection for a wide range of selection intensity and provides 
reasonably accurate estimates of the population genetic parameters. The proposed 
method is applied to genomic sequences of humans, chimpanzees, gorillas, and 
orangutans and identifies a list of lineage-specific targets of positive 
selection. The positively selected genes in the human lineage are enriched in 
pathways of gene expression regulation, immune system and metabolism, etc. Our 
analysis provides insights into natural evolution in the coding regions of 
humans and great apes and thus serves as a basis for further molecular and 
functional studies.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz046
PMID: 30840083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1629. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1162-1171. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz047.

Substructured Population Growth in the Ashkenazi Jews Inferred with Approximate 
Bayesian Computation.

Gladstein AL(1), Hammer MF(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ.
(2)Arizona Research Laboratory Division of Biotechnology, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ.

The Ashkenazi Jews (AJ) are a population isolate sharing ancestry with both 
European and Middle Eastern populations that has likely resided in Central 
Europe since at least the tenth century. Between the 11th and 16th centuries, 
the AJ population expanded eastward leading to two culturally distinct 
communities in Western/Central and Eastern Europe. Our aim was to determine 
whether the western and eastern groups are genetically distinct, and if so, what 
demographic processes contributed to population differentiation. We used 
Approximate Bayesian Computation to choose among models of AJ history and to 
infer demographic parameter values, including divergence times, effective 
population sizes, and levels of gene flow. For the ABC analysis, we used allele 
frequency spectrum and identical by descent-based statistics to capture 
information on a wide timescale. We also mitigated the effects of ascertainment 
bias when performing ABC on SNP array data by jointly modeling and inferring SNP 
discovery. We found that the most likely model was population differentiation 
between Eastern and Western AJ ∼400 years ago. The differentiation between the 
Eastern and Western AJ could be attributed to more extreme population growth in 
the Eastern AJ (0.250 per generation) than the Western AJ (0.069 per 
generation).

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz047
PMID: 30840069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1630. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1148-1161. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz045.

Blast Fungal Genomes Show Frequent Chromosomal Changes, Gene Gains and Losses, 
and Effector Gene Turnover.

Gómez Luciano LB(1)(2)(3), Tsai IJ(1), Chuma I(4), Tosa Y(5), Chen YH(1), Li 
JY(1), Li MY(1), Lu MJ(1), Nakayashiki H(5), Li WH(1)(3)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, National Chung-Hsing University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Molecular and Biological Agricultural Sciences Program, Taiwan International 
Graduate Program, Academia Sinica and National Chung-Hsing University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(4)Obihiro University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido, Japan.
(5)Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.
(6)Biotechnology Center, National Chung-Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Pyricularia is a fungal genus comprising several pathogenic species causing the 
blast disease in monocots. Pyricularia oryzae, the best-known species, infects 
rice, wheat, finger millet, and other crops. As past comparative and population 
genomics studies mainly focused on isolates of P. oryzae, the genomes of the 
other Pyricularia species have not been well explored. In this study, we 
obtained a chromosomal-level genome assembly of the finger millet isolate P. 
oryzae MZ5-1-6 and also highly contiguous assemblies of Pyricularia sp. LS, P. 
grisea, and P. pennisetigena. The differences in the genomic content of 
repetitive DNA sequences could largely explain the variation in genome size 
among these new genomes. Moreover, we found extensive gene gains and losses and 
structural changes among Pyricularia genomes, including a large interchromosomal 
translocation. We searched for homologs of known blast effectors across fungal 
taxa and found that most avirulence effectors are specific to Pyricularia, 
whereas many other effectors share homologs with distant fungal taxa. In 
particular, we discovered a novel effector family with metalloprotease activity, 
distinct from the well-known AVR-Pita family. We predicted 751 gene families 
containing putative effectors in 7 Pyricularia genomes and found that 60 of them 
showed differential expression in the P. oryzae MZ5-1-6 transcriptomes obtained 
under experimental conditions mimicking the pathogen infection process. In 
summary, this study increased our understanding of the structural, functional, 
and evolutionary genomics of the blast pathogen and identified new potential 
effector genes, providing useful data for developing crops with durable 
resistance.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz045
PMID: 30835262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1631. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1134-1147. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz044.

Emergence of a Chimeric Globin Pseudogene and Increased Hemoglobin Oxygen 
Affinity Underlie the Evolution of Aquatic Specializations in Sirenia.

Signore AV(1)(2), Paijmans JLA(3), Hofreiter M(3), Fago A(4), Weber RE(4), 
Springer MS(5), Campbell KL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry and Biology, University of Potsdam, Germany.
(4)Department of Bioscience, Zoophysiology, Aarhus University, Denmark.
(5)Department of Evolution, Ecology, and Organismal Biology, University of 
California, Riverside, CA.

As limits on O2 availability during submergence impose severe constraints on 
aerobic respiration, the oxygen binding globin proteins of marine mammals are 
expected to have evolved under strong evolutionary pressures during their 
land-to-sea transition. Here, we address this question for the order Sirenia by 
retrieving, annotating, and performing detailed selection analyses on the globin 
repertoire of the extinct Steller's sea cow (Hydrodamalis gigas), dugong (Dugong 
dugon), and Florida manatee (Trichechus manatus latirostris) in relation to 
their closest living terrestrial relatives (elephants and hyraxes). These 
analyses indicate most loci experienced elevated nucleotide substitution rates 
during their transition to a fully aquatic lifestyle. While most of these genes 
evolved under neutrality or strong purifying selection, the rate of 
nonsynonymous/synonymous replacements increased in two genes (Hbz-T1 and Hba-T1) 
that encode the α-type chains of hemoglobin (Hb) during each stage of life. 
Notably, the relaxed evolution of Hba-T1 is temporally coupled with the 
emergence of a chimeric pseudogene (Hba-T2/Hbq-ps) that contributed to the 
tandemly linked Hba-T1 of stem sirenians via interparalog gene conversion. 
Functional tests on recombinant Hb proteins from extant and ancestral sirenians 
further revealed that the molecular remodeling of Hba-T1 coincided with 
increased Hb-O2 affinity in early sirenians. Available evidence suggests that 
this trait evolved to maximize O2 extraction from finite lung stores and 
suppress tissue O2 offloading, thereby facilitating the low metabolic 
intensities of extant sirenians. In contrast, the derived reduction in Hb-O2 
affinity in (sub)Arctic Steller's sea cows is consistent with fueling increased 
thermogenesis by these once colossal marine herbivores.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz044
PMCID: PMC6526914
PMID: 30828717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1632. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1121-1133. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz042.

Plasticity of Promoter-Core Sequences Allows Bacteria to Compensate for the Loss 
of a Key Global Regulatory Gene.

Lamrabet O(1), Plumbridge J(2), Martin M(1), Lenski RE(3)(4), Schneider D(1), 
Hindré T(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, TIMC-IMAG, Grenoble, France.
(2)CNRS UMR8261, Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut de 
Biologie Physico-chimique, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI.
(4)BEACON Center for the Study of Evolution in Action, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI.

Transcription regulatory networks (TRNs) are of central importance for both 
short-term phenotypic adaptation in response to environmental fluctuations and 
long-term evolutionary adaptation, with global regulatory genes often being 
targets of natural selection in laboratory experiments. Here, we combined 
evolution experiments, whole-genome resequencing, and molecular genetics to 
investigate the driving forces, genetic constraints, and molecular mechanisms 
that dictate how bacteria can cope with a drastic perturbation of their TRNs. 
The crp gene, encoding a major global regulator in Escherichia coli, was deleted 
in four different genetic backgrounds, all derived from the Long-Term Evolution 
Experiment (LTEE) but with different TRN architectures. We confirmed that crp 
deletion had a more deleterious effect on growth rate in the LTEE-adapted 
genotypes; and we showed that the ptsG gene, which encodes the major glucose-PTS 
transporter, gained CRP (cyclic AMP receptor protein) dependence over time in 
the LTEE. We then further evolved the four crp-deleted genotypes in glucose 
minimal medium, and we found that they all quickly recovered from their growth 
defects by increasing glucose uptake. We showed that this recovery was specific 
to the selective environment and consistently relied on mutations in the 
cis-regulatory region of ptsG, regardless of the initial genotype. These 
mutations affected the interplay of transcription factors acting at the 
promoters, changed the intrinsic properties of the existing promoters, or 
produced new transcription initiation sites. Therefore, the plasticity of even a 
single promoter region can compensate by three different mechanisms for the loss 
of a key regulatory hub in the E. coli TRN.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz042
PMID: 30825312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1633. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1294-1301. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz043.

Polymorphism-Aware Species Trees with Advanced Mutation Models, Bootstrap, and 
Rate Heterogeneity.

Schrempf D(1)(2)(3), Minh BQ(3)(4)(5), von Haeseler A(3)(6), Kosiol C(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Physics, Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, 
Hungary.
(2)Centre for Biological Diversity, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Center for Integrative Bioinformatics Vienna, Max F. Perutz Laboratories, 
University of Vienna, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Ecology and Evolution, Research School of Biology, Australian National 
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(5)Research School of Computer Science, Australian National University, 
Canberra, ACT, Australia.
(6)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Faculty of Computer Science, 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Institut für Populationsgenetik, Vetmeduni Vienna, Austria.

Molecular phylogenetics has neglected polymorphisms within present and ancestral 
populations for a long time. Recently, multispecies coalescent based methods 
have increased in popularity, however, their application is limited to a small 
number of species and individuals. We introduced a polymorphism-aware 
phylogenetic model (PoMo), which overcomes this limitation and scales well with 
the increasing amount of sequence data whereas accounting for present and 
ancestral polymorphisms. PoMo circumvents handling of gene trees and directly 
infers species trees from allele frequency data. Here, we extend the PoMo 
implementation in IQ-TREE and integrate search for the statistically best-fit 
mutation model, the ability to infer mutation rate variation across sites, and 
assessment of branch support values. We exemplify an analysis of a hundred 
species with ten haploid individuals each, showing that PoMo can perform 
inference on large data sets. While PoMo is more accurate than standard 
substitution models applied to concatenated alignments, it is almost as fast. We 
also provide bmm-simulate, a software package that allows simulation of 
sequences evolving under PoMo. The new options consolidate the value of PoMo for 
phylogenetic analyses with population data.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz043
PMCID: PMC6526911
PMID: 30825307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1634. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jul 1;36(7):1565-1579. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz038.

An ABC Method for Whole-Genome Sequence Data: Inferring Paleolithic and 
Neolithic Human Expansions.

Jay F(1)(2), Boitard S(3), Austerlitz F(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire EcoAnthropologie et Ethnobiologie, CNRS/MNHN/Université Paris 
Diderot, Paris, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Recherche en Informatique, CNRS/Université 
Paris-Sud/Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay, France.
(3)GenPhySE, Université de Toulouse, INRA, INPT, INP-ENVT, Castanet Tolosan, 
France.

Species generally undergo a complex demographic history consisting, in 
particular, of multiple changes in population size. Genome-wide sequencing data 
are potentially highly informative for reconstructing this demographic history. 
A crucial point is to extract the relevant information from these very large 
data sets. Here, we design an approach for inferring past demographic events 
from a moderate number of fully sequenced genomes. Our new approach uses 
Approximate Bayesian Computation, a simulation-based statistical framework that 
allows 1) identifying the best demographic scenario among several competing 
scenarios and 2) estimating the best-fitting parameters under the chosen 
scenario. Approximate Bayesian Computation relies on the computation of summary 
statistics. Using a cross-validation approach, we show that statistics such as 
the lengths of haplotypes shared between individuals, or the decay of linkage 
disequilibrium with distance, can be combined with classical statistics (e.g., 
heterozygosity and Tajima's D) to accurately infer complex demographic scenarios 
including bottlenecks and expansion periods. We also demonstrate the importance 
of simultaneously estimating the genotyping error rate. Applying our method on 
genome-wide human-sequence databases, we finally show that a model consisting in 
a bottleneck followed by a Paleolithic and a Neolithic expansion is the most 
relevant for Eurasian populations.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz038
PMID: 30785202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1635. Mol Biol Evol. 2019 Jun 1;36(6):1113-1120. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msz024.

Shared Ancient Sex Chromosomes in Varanids, Beaded Lizards, and Alligator 
Lizards.

Rovatsos M(1), Rehák I(2), Velenský P(2), Kratochvíl L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
(2)Prague Zoological Garden, Prague, Czech Republic.

Sex determination in varanids, Gila monsters, beaded lizards, and other 
anguimorphan lizards is still poorly understood. Sex chromosomes were reported 
only in a few species based solely on cytogenetics, which precluded assessment 
of their homology. We uncovered Z-chromosome-specific genes in varanids from 
their transcriptomes. Comparison of differences in gene copy numbers between 
sexes across anguimorphan lizards and outgroups revealed that homologous 
differentiated ZZ/ZW sex chromosomes are present in Gila monsters, beaded 
lizards, alligator lizards, and a wide phylogenetic spectrum of varanids. 
However, these sex chromosomes are not homologous to those known in other 
amniotes. We conclude that differentiated sex chromosomes were already present 
in the common ancestor of Anguimorpha living in the early Cretaceous or even in 
the Jurassic Period, 115-180 Ma, placing anguimorphan sex chromosomes among the 
oldest known in vertebrates. The analysis of transcriptomes of Komodo dragon 
(Varanus komodoensis) showed that the expression levels of genes linked to 
anguimorphan sex chromosomes are not balanced between sexes. Besides expanding 
our knowledge on vertebrate sex chromosome evolution, our study has important 
practical relevance for breeding and ecological studies. We introduce the first, 
widely applicable technique of molecular sexing in varanids, Gila monsters, and 
beaded lizards, where reliable determination of sex based on external morphology 
is dubious even in adults.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msz024
PMID: 30722046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]